1. Cabinet’s position on prominent issues in the current environment1.1. Cabinet welcomed the public launch of the sixth edition of the Development Indicators by the Minister in the Presidency for Performance Monitoring and Evaluation. As the nation prepares to celebrate 20 Years of Freedom, South Africans should be proud that life has changed for the better since 1994.The indicators show improvement in key areas and simultaneously point to the hard work still required to deal with some of our more persistent challenges. Furthermore, the indicators encourage debate on the challenges our country faces and act as markers along our journey of socio-economic progress.1.2. Cabinet commended the 41% (115) of municipalities that received unqualified financial statements on the 2011/2012 financial audits.  It further acknowledged the improvement made by the 21 municipalities that previously received the adverse or disclaimed opinions in the previous year.Cabinet appreciates the work done by the Auditor General in assisting the municipalities to improve on the governance compliance requirements.  It also acknowledged the commitment made by the municipality leadership to continue to work on further improving the areas highlighted by the Auditor General.1.3 Cabinet thanked all South Africans for their support of the Nelson Mandela Sport and Cultural Day hosted in aid of the Nelson Mandela Children's Hospital project. South Africans are encouraged to continue working in communities and partnering with government to improve the lives of citizens and bring to life the ideals to which Madiba dedicated his life.1.4  Cabinet noted the upcoming visit of President Jacob Zuma to the Russian Republic. He will be attending the Group of 20 (G20) Summit in St  Petersburg on 5 and 6 September 2013 as part of promoting South Africa’s   political and economic interests.South Africa continues to support the G20’s development agenda that advances global economic stability and long-term sustainable growth and job creation.1.5  Cabinet commended the first meeting of the Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa (BRICS) Business Council, which saw business leaders from these countries converge in South Africa. The meeting was also attended by prominent business leaders from 19 other African countries.1.6  Cabinet welcomed the assurance given at the 12th annual African Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA) Forum to renew AGOA before it expires in 2015.  AGOA has benefited both the United States and the African continent  and has underpinned a growing and relatively balanced bilateral trade relationship between South Africa and the United States (US).SA believes AGOA offers an appropriate framework to build stronger, mutually beneficial bilateral trade and investment relations and strengthen cooperation between the US and the broader African continent.1.7 As part of the nationwide celebration of Women’s Month, Deputy President  Kgalema Motlanthe will on Friday, 23 August 2013 visit Gombani Village in  Mutale Municipality, Limpopo, to hand over houses to the community. The  women of Gombani actively participated in building these houses. President Jacob Zuma will join the Men’s March against Gender-Based Violence at Johannesburg Stadium, on 24 August 2013. All men are invited to join the Men’s March against Gender-Based Violence at Johannesburg Stadium, on 24 August 2013 and commit to eradicate all forms of violence and abuse against women and children.1.8 The Minister of Tourism will also launch Tourism Month on 28 August 2013 at the Amanzingwe Lodge, Hartebeespoort, under the theme: “Water is Fun.”As part of the month’s activities, a National Tourism Career Expo will be held at the East London International Convention Centre between 19 and 21 September 2013 to showcase job opportunities in this growing sector which already employs more than a half million South Africans.1.9 Cabinet noted that the Minister of Rural Development and Land Reform will officially hand over 70 houses to beneficiaries of District Six, on Saturday, 24 August 2013. This is part of an effort of reversing the legacy of the 1913 Natives Land Act which left thousands of black people homeless and landless.1.10 Cabinet also deliberated on the issues emanating from the Cabinet Lekgotla held on 13-15 August, 2013. Minister Rob Davies is here to brief on Cabinet’s decisions in this regard.Enquiries:Phumla Williams (Acting Cabinet Spokesperson)Cell: 083 501 0139
