A.  Issues in the environment1.  Water security1.1.  Cabinet thanked South Africans for adhering to water restrictions implemented in certain parts of Johannesburg, Tshwane and Ekurhuleni to stabilise the capacity of reservoirs. Dams and reservoirs remain under pressure due to high temperatures in Gauteng, and increasing demand forced Rand Water to reduce water supply to municipalities drastically. The water utility supplies bulk potable water to more than 11 million people in Gauteng, parts of Mpumalanga, the Free State and North West.1.2.  These unavoidable restrictions aim to secure water supply and will remain in place until the situation improves. Cabinet called on the public to continue adhering to the water restrictions and play their part by using this scarce resource sparingly.2.  Transnet strike2.1.  Cabinet welcomed the three-year wage deal reached between Transnet and the United National Transport Union (UNTU), which is applicable for the period 1 April 2022 to 31 March 2025. The Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration mediated this deal, which ended the current industrial action by members of UNTU with immediate effect. Cabinet also welcomed the decision by the South African Transport and Allied Workers Union to call off the strike.2.2.  Cabinet welcomed the commitment by Transnet to focus on clearing backlogs that occurred across the port and rail system during the industrial action, which negatively impacted the economy and sectors that are dependent on its services. 2.3.  Cabinet expressed its gratitude to the support and cooperation given by business during the strike.  It encourages a continuous relationship between Transnet management and labour for the benefit of the company and the economy of the country.3.  South Africa – Saudi Arabia relations3.1.    Cabinet welcomed the successful Working Visit to the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia by President Cyril Ramaphosa on 15 and 16 October 2022. During the visit, the two countries signed 17 Memoranda of Understanding (MoUs) in various fields such as agriculture, fisheries, mining, renewable energy, security, transport and aquaculture. Other MoUs signed are on the establishment of a Joint Business Council, cooperation in the field of military industries and procurements, and on geological survey cooperation.3.2.    The President used the visit to invite Saudi Arabia businesses to South Africa’s fifth investment conference that will be held in 2023. Saudi Arabia is South Africa’s second largest trading partner in the Middle East and the largest source of imports from the region. International relations between both countries have resulted in a positive effect on trade and investment trends.4.  Infrastructure investment4.1.  Cabinet welcomed the commissioning of a state-of-the-art plastics production plant by leading international manufacturer, the ALPLA Group, at Lanseria in Gauteng.4.2.  This augments President Ramaphosa’s commitment to position infrastructure development as a means to stimulate the economy and increase employment. 4.3.  The investment worth US$50 million is a key contribution to the Lanseria Smart City masterplan that will drive sustainability and recycling as well as create and sustain 350 jobs. Included is an apprenticeship programme for 36 mechatronics and recycling technicians for ALPLA Group operations across southern Africa. The apprentice programme will commence in 2023, with the first 12 South African apprentices coming from local communities.5.  Illegal mining5.1.  Illegal mining hurts communities and our economy, and results in a loss of revenue for both government and the mining sector. 5.2.  Cabinet welcomed the seizure of a firearms cache and the arrest of 20 suspects linked to illegal mining during an operation at a mineshaft in Stilfontein in North West.5.3.  Cabinet appeals to South Africans to continue working with law-enforcement agencies to ensure the success of future anti-crime operations. This will send a strong message that crime does not pay, and that criminals will be arrested and prosecuted without fear or favour. 6.  Energy 6.1.  Eskom recently signed 30-year lease agreements with four independent power producer investors to construct new clean-energy generation capacity at Majuba and Tutuka power stations in Mpumalanga. The land leases will attract an estimated investment of about R40 billion.6.2.  The four investors – HDF Energy South Africa, Red Rocket SA, Sola Group and Mainstream Renewable Power Developments South Africa – will contribute at least 2 000 megawatts to the national electricity grid.6.3.  The new generation capacity is expected to be connected to the grid within 24 to 36 months from financial closure, subject to environmental, land zoning and other regulatory approvals.7.  Food security7.1.  Cabinet welcomed the hosting of the Agri SA Congress 2022 in Pretoria on 13 and 14 October 2022 under the theme: “Growing Local”. The congress engaged on issues such as making agriculture masterplans work for local growers; sustainable infrastructure for locally grown food; making the local environment sustainable for local food production into the future, and strengthening food producers’ capacity to process locally grown produce.7.2.  In further prioritising food security, Cabinet also welcomed the launch of the National Biosecurity Hub, by the Department of Science and Innovation's Agricultural Bio-economy Innovation Partnership Programme, in collaboration with the University of Pretoria. The hub will support the prevention, reduction and management of crop and animal disease, which will contribute to increased productivity, food security and sustainable rural development.B.  Cabinet decisions1.  Ratification of the Decentralisation Charter of the African Union (AU)1.1.  Cabinet approved the submission to Parliament the AU Charter on the Values and Principles of Decentralisation, Local Governance and Local Development for ratification. South Africa signed the charter in August 2021.1.2.  The Decentralisation Charter provides a framework to all member states a guiding document on the decentralisation of powers and functions from national to other spheres of government. The charter deals largely with the decentralisation of authority and functions, local governance framework and local development.2.  32nd Annual International Railway Safety Council (IRSC)2.1.  Cabinet approved the hosting of the 32nd Annual IRSC Meeting in Johannesburg from 1 to 6 October 2023 under the theme: “Reshaping railways in an uncertain World”.2.2.  The IRSC is an international forum that brings together railway safety professionals from all over the world to exchange experiences so as to improve railway safety. 2.3.  As a member of the IRSC, South Africa’s Railway Safety Regulator last hosted this forum in 2015.3.  Draft National Infrastructure Plan 2050 (NIP 2050) Phase 23.1.  Cabinet approved the gazetting of the draft NIP 2050 Phase 2 for public consultation.  The plan offers direction in strengthening and augmenting government strategic integrated projects. 3.2.  It identifies the strategic projects in human settlements; municipal electricity; water; solid waste; passenger transport; education and health infrastructure; digital infrastructure, and crime and corruption.3.3.  The format of the plan provides a vision of the area to be tackled, offers an assessment of the current status, outlines the essential conditions for success and states what needs to be done to achieve the vision. It proposes the implementation process to be taken over the three-year running cycle action plan.4.  National Implementation Framework towards the Professionalisation of the Public Service 4.1.  Cabinet approved the National Implementation Framework towards the Professionalisation of the Public Service. The framework was published for public consultation in 2021. 4.2.  The framework provides five pillars on interventions in professionalising the Public Service. The pillars include pre-entry recruitment and selection within the Public Service; induction and onboarding; planning and performance management; continuous learning and professional development, and career progression and career incidents.5.  Changes in the conditions of employment for Directors-General (DGs)5.1.  Cabinet approved the report that proposes measures to strengthen the capacity and capability of the DGs in the Public Service. The report made several proposals,  including the tenure of DGs and the management of delegations by the Executive Authority to the accounting officers. 5.2.  The report also proposed that the DG in The Presidency will be designated as the Head of Public Administration. In the provinces, this function will be designated to the DGs in the offices of the Premiers. The report further proposed measures to guide departments on the management of contracts of DGs.5.3.  The revised Performance Management System for DGs is being revised to align it with the approved changes.5.3.  The Acting Minister of Public Service and Administration, Mr Thulas Nxesi, will next week convene a media briefing to outline the National Implementation Framework towards the Professionalisation of the Public Service and also unpack the approved changes in the conditions of employment for DGs.6.  Fifth Progress Report on the Implementation of the White Paper on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (WPRPD) 2020-20216.1. Cabinet approved the Fifth Progress Report on the Implementation of the WPRPD, which provides an update on the implementation of the WPRPD. The report covers inputs from national and provincial government departments. It provides updates on the policy implementation that include budget allocations. 6.2.  The first annual progress report was published in 2017.  This fifth progress report has been approved to be gazetted and published by the Department of Women, Youth and Persons with Disabilities.7.  Amendment to Article 20(1) of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW)7.1.  Cabinet approved the submission to Parliament of the amendment to Article 20(1) of the CEDAW for ratification. The amendments provide for an increased duration of the committee meetings that process the member states’ reports.7.2.  South Africa signed this convention in 1993 and subsequently ratified it in December 1995. The submission to Parliament seeks to align the previously ratified convention with the amendment to Article 20(1) of the convention.8.  Global Convention on the Recognition of Qualifications concerning Higher Education  8.1.  Cabinet approved the submission to Parliament of the Global Convention on the Recognition of Qualifications concerning Higher Education for ratification. Once ratified it will be deposited to the United Nations (UN) Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and domestically enabled through the National Qualifications Framework Act, 2008 (Act 67 of 2008).8.2.  The Global Convention establishes universal principles for fair, transparent and non-discriminatory recognition of higher education qualifications and qualifications. It allows for the recognition of foreign qualifications in 193 UN member states.9.  Withdrawal of the amendments to the Guide for Members of the Executive9.1.  Cabinet endorsed the announcement made by The Presidency on Monday, 17 October 2022 to withdraw the amendments made to the Guide for Members of the Executive, also called the Ministerial Handbook, for 2022.9.2.  The amendments that were made in April 2022 provided for additional capacity to some of the offices of the Ministers who are responsible for more than one portfolio. They also required the State to take over full responsibility for the costs associated with the provision of electricity and water to official residences occupied by members of the executive. 9.3.  Cabinet noted the concerns raised by the public and resolved to review the Guide for Members of the Executive. This process will be handled by a neutral structure and once completed, the guide will be made public through the Department of Public Service and Administration’s website: www.dpsa.gov.za.10. Just Energy Transition Partnership (JETP) and JETP Investment Plan (JETP-IP)10.1.  After welcoming a presentation on the JETP and the JETP-IP, Cabinet endorsed the JETP-IP and expressed its appreciation of the detailed work undertaken to develop it. 10.2.  The JETP-IP outlines the investments required to achieve the decarbonisation commitments made by the Government of South Africa while promoting sustainable development, and ensuring a just transition for affected workers and communities. 10.3.  The Inter-Ministerial Committee on Climate Change will soon hold a media briefing to provide more details.C.  Bills1.  Merchant Shipping Bill of 20221.1.  Cabinet has approved the submission of the Merchant Shipping Bill of 2022 to Parliament for further processing. The Bill overhauls the 70-year-old Merchant Shipping Act, 1951 (Act 57 of 1951).1.2.  Once enacted, the Bill will provide the merchant shipping legal framework to regulate ships’ value chain. It will regulate amongst others the designing, registration, naming and scrapping of ships.1.3.  These changes will contribute towards reviving the maritime transport sector and also aligning the country with the International Maritime Organisation Convention. South Africa has ratified this convention.    2.  Statistics Amendment Bill of 2020 2.1.  Cabinet approved the submission to Parliament of the Statistics Amendment Bill of 2022 for further processing. The Bill proposes the amendment to the Statistics Act, 1999 (Act 6 of 1999). The amendments provide for the development and implementation of the National Statistics System that supports evidence-based decisions. 2.2.  They strengthen the existing coordination between Statistics South Africa and other organs of state, and broaden the regulatory framework of the Act.D.  Upcoming events1.  National Presidential Small, Micro and Medium Enterprises (SMME) and Cooperatives Summit1.1.  The Department of Small Business Development, in partnership with private-sector stakeholders, will host the National Presidential SMME and Cooperatives Summit in Bryanston, Gauteng from 13 to 15 November 2022.1.2.  The summit will bring together private and public sector key actors in the small enterprise ecosystem, to deliberate on finding ways to collaborate in strengthening this sector. Expected participants include chambers of commerce, SMME practitioners, academics, policymakers and development finance institutions.1.3.  The summit will also discuss the National Integrated Small Enterprise Development Masterplan, which provides a strategic framework to strengthen the SMME sector. The summit is also expected to introduce the Annual National Presidential SMME Awards.2.  Hosting of the Presidential Gender-Based Violence and Femicide (GBVF) Summit 2022 2.1.  President Ramaphosa will host the second Presidential GBVF Summit at the Gallagher Convention Centre in Gauteng on 1 and 2 November 2022. The first summit held in 2018 was used to recommit government and social partners to ending the high incidents of violence against women in the country. 2.2.  The second summit will be used to take stock of the progress made in the implementation of the National Strategic Plan on GBVF. It will be hosted under the theme: “Accountability; Acceleration and Amplification NOW”. 2.3.  The summit will deliberate on, amongst other issues, finding ways to accelerate actions and accountability from key departments and all the stakeholders that include civil society, the private sector and labour. 3.  Fifth Presidential Imbizo to the Northern Cape3.1.  The Fifth District Development Model (DDM) Presidential Imbizo in Upington, Northern Cape will take place on Friday, 21 October 2022 at the local Mxolisi Dicky Jacobs Stadium. 3.2.  The DDM Presidential Imbizo will assess service-delivery progress and challenges in the Northern Cape and intervene to resolve them. The DDM ensures that service-delivery planning, implementation and budgeting are integrated to enhance service delivery to communities. 3.3.  Leading up to the Imbizo, Ministers, members of the executive councils and mayors will embark on community-outreach activities in and around Upington. 4.  Medium Term Budget Policy Statement (MTBPS) 4.1.  Cabinet believes that the 2022 MTBPS to be tabled by Finance Minister Enoch Godongwana on Wednesday, 26 October 2022 is an important part of South Africa’s open and accountable budgeting process. 4.2.  The MTBPS gives substance to government's commitments within an overall level of spending that the nation can afford. It further details how government will close the gap between revenue and expenditure, and make the most of the available resources. 5.  Matric Exams5.1.  The 2022 National Senior Certificate examinations begin on 31 October and end on 7 December 2022.  Cabinet wishes the Class of 2022 well as they embark on the final leg of their school journey. The continued support from teachers, parents and guardians will go a long way in helping these learners to face these exams with confidence. 5.2.  Cabinet urges parents and guardians to play their part by encouraging and motivating the learners, and creating a conducive environment for studying at home.6.  National Development Plan (NDP) and State Capacity Conference6.1.  The Department of Public Service and Administration, in partnership with the National Planning Commission and the University of KwaZulu-Natal School of Development Studies, will host the NDP and State Capacity Conference from 7 to 9 November 2022 at Howard College Campus, University of KwaZulu-Natal. 6.2.  The conference will reflect on state capacity and performance in the first 10 years of the NDP, and will be held under the theme: “Reflections on State Capacity and Government Performance through the first ten-years of the NDP”.7.  Handing over of the Certificate of Recognition to King MisuZulu ka Zwelithini7.1.  President Ramaphosa will hand over the Certificate of Recognition to His Majesty King MisuZulu ka Zwelithini at the Moses Mabhida Stadium in Durban on Saturday, 29 October 2022.  7.2.  This follows the customary coronation “Ukungena eSibayeni” ceremony of His Majesty held on 20 August 2022, which ascended him to the throne as King of the Zulu Nation.E.  Messages1.  Congratulations     Cabinet extended its congratulations and well-wishes to: Mr Sam Matekane, the Prime Minister-elect of the Kingdom of Lesotho. Cabinet also joined the AU Election Observation Mission to the 7 October 2022 National Assembly Elections in the Kingdom of Lesotho in commending the electoral and political maturity of the People of the Kingdom of Lesotho for conducting the successful elections. South Africa remains dedicated to strengthening and consolidating bilateral relations as well as enhancing cooperation on regional, continental and global issues of mutual interest.2.  Condolences      Cabinet expressed condolences to the family and friends of: Father Albert Nolan (88), a dedicated South African Catholic Priest who challenged the religious views that sought to entrench the apartheid system. In 2003, then President Thabo Mbeki awarded him the Order of Luthuli in Silver for his “lifelong dedication to the struggle for democracy, human rights and justice and for challenging the religious dogma including the theological justification for apartheid”. F.    Appointments1.  All appointments are subject to the verification of qualifications and the relevant clearance.a.  Adv James Mlawu – Director-General: Department of Transport. b.  Mr Shabeer Khan – Accountant-General: National Treasury.2.  Cabinet concurred with the following appointments:2.1.    South African Tourism Board members:a.  Dr Nondumiso Maphazi (Chairperson);b.  Dr Aubrey Mhlongo (Deputy Chairperson);c.  Ms Pretty Ntombela;d.  Ms Nomahlubi Mazwai;e.  Mr Odwa Mtati;f.  Mr Ravi Nadasen (Reappointment);g.  Mr Enver Duminy (Reappointment);h.  Ms Nandipha Mzileni Mbulawa;i.  Mr Mduduzi Zakwe (Reappointment);j.  Ms Rosemary Anderson;k.  Ms Lehlohonolo Rapodile; andl.  Ms Nonkqubela Silulwane (Departmental representative).2.2.  Road Traffic Management Corporation Board members:a.  Dr Eddie Mogalefi Thebe (Reappointment);b.  Ms Thandi Clara Thankge (Reappointment);c.  Prof Maredi Mphahlele;d.  Ms Nomusa Mufamadi (Chairperson);e.  Adv Xola Stemela;f.   Ms Lerato Magalo;g.  Prof Chitja Twala;h.  Mr Nkumeleni John Kudzingana;i.  Ms N Jaxa (Alternate member); and j.  Ms HM Mbanyele-Ntshinga (Alternate member).2.3.  Mr Tshepo Monaheng – Chief Executive Officer (CEO): South African Forestry Company (Contract renewed for three (3) years).2.4.  Mr Reginald Lavhelesani Demana – CEO: South African National Roads Agency. 2.5.  Ms Ditebogo Kgomo – CEO: National Nuclear Regulator.2.6.  Mr Risenga Maluleke – Statistician-General (Renewal of contract).2.7.  Ms Kedibone Olga Madiehe – CEO: Government Pensions Administration Agency.Enquiries:Ms Phumla Williams – Cabinet Spokesperson Mobile: 083 501 0139 
