1.
Cabinet’s position on current issues.1 Cabinet welcomes the launch by President Jacob Zuma of Operation Phakisa, which fast-tracks delivery through detailed implementation plans, problem-solving and practical actions to drive growth.
The Department of Environmental Affairs will be the first department to lead collaboration with the industry, labour, civil society and academia to work together to unlock the economic potential of our WEBTOKEN 2010, the ocean economy – or blue economy, as it is also known - contributed about R54 billion to South Africa’s Gross Domestic Product (GDP), and accounted for approximately 316 000 jobs.
Evidence shows that South Africa’s oceans could contribute up to R177 billion to GDP by 2033.
The ocean also has a potential to create between 800 000 and one million direct jobs.
These growth levers reflect at least 4 percent annual growth in both Gross Domestic Product contribution and job creation.
Marine aquaculture, marine transport, offshore oil and gas exploration and marine protection have all been identified as focus areas of the blue economy.
A delivery lab has been established under each area to help resolve critical challenges.2 Cabinet thanks all South Africans and the world for participating in this year’s Nelson Mandela International Day.
South Africans from every part of our country answered the call to dedicate their time and energy towards making a difference.
The clean-up operation beautifies our surroundings and ensures the preservation of our environment.
As part of this campaign, the Department of Cooperative Government and Traditional Affairs (Cogta) dispatched about 150 Municipal Technical officials across municipalities to take part in this clean-up campaign, but also to support municipalities throughout the year.
Campaigns such as the “War on Leaks” will continue and be intensified where unemployed youth and other community members will be encouraged to join government in fixing water leaks.
Cabinet calls on communities to keep rivers and streams clean and clear, as this contributes to healthy, safe and decent living conditions.
Polluted rivers and streams threaten the livelihoods of downstream communities.3 Cabinet welcomes the agreement to launch the New Development Bank (NDB) at the Sixth BRICS Summit in Brazil and to establish the bank's regional office in Johannesburg.
The NDB will strengthen the cooperation among BRICS member countries and will supplement the efforts of other multilateral and regional financial institutions, thus contributing to the collective commitments of BRICS member countries for achieving the goal of strong, sustainable and balanced growth.
The regional office will play an important role in funding infrastructure and sustainable development projects in Africa.
Built into the operating model of the NDB is a project preparation facility which will enable the realisation of a number of potential infrastructure projects on the continent.
These have hitherto not been implemented because of the lack of funding for project preparation, a key step in making project ideas ready for funding and implementation.4 Cabinet expressed great concern over the escalation in violence between Israel and the Palestinian territories.
Cabinet reiterates President Zuma’s call on the Israeli government to stop its ground and air offensive, which continues to cause loss of life and a devastating humanitarian crisis.
Furthermore, it calls for an end to the firing of rockets on Israeli citizens by Hamas.
Cabinet is opposed to the veiled attempts by the Israeli Government to use its onslaught on Gaza to undermine the Unity Government in Palestine.
There will never be a military solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
The only solution lies in serious and genuine negotiations involving all parties.
South Africa joins the UN Secretary General, Mr Ban Ki-moon, in calling for an immediate ceasefire by all sides, and a resumption of the flow of humanitarian aid to the suffering people of Gaza.
The humanitarian situation is of great concern to Cabinet.
Government appeals to the Egyptian authorities to open their doors to the injured and affected people of Gaza.5 On behalf of the people of the Republic of South Africa, Cabinet conveys its condolences to the families and friends of all the victims of the Malaysia Airlines plane that crashed in Ukraine on 17 July 20.6 Cabinet conveys its condolences to the family and friends of the Nobel Prize-winning author Nadine Gordimer who passed away recently.
South Africa will always remember Ms Gordimer as a brave activist who used her pen and courageous voice to speak out against the injustices of the apartheid regime.
Ms Gordimer was a founding member of the Congress of South African Writers (COSAW) and as a member of the African National Congress in 1989, she testified in mitigation of sentence for 11 United Democratic Front leaders and Vaal Civil Association activists.
Her fiction, which played an important role in the struggle against apartheid, documented the effect that institutionalised racism had on the lives of ordinary South Africans.7 Cabinet sends it condolences to the parents of the 4 year old Taegrin Morris who was killed in a high jacking incidence in Reiger Park South of Johannesburg.
Cabinet further joins in condemning such brutality especially on children.
Cabinet further thanked the police and the members of the public that assisted in the safe return of Mongezi Phike who was recently kidnaped after they hijack his father.8 Cabinet reminds South Africans that the Chancery of Orders is inviting nominations from members of the public, non-governmental organisations, civic- and faith-based organisations for individuals deemed worthy recipients of National Orders.
National Orders are the highest form of recognition that a country bestows on deserving citizens.
The President as the Grand Patron of the National Orders awards these orders.
Members of the public are requested to submit names of an outstanding individual in their community using a form available from WEBTOKEThis must be accompanied by a separate motivation covering the following areas:an introductory paragraph with summary of the nominee’s achievementsa list of exceptional milestones reached by the nominee in his/her career and/or international arena anda description of the exceptional, outstanding, dedicated service or act of bravery rendered by the nominee.
The nominations will close on 31 July Key Cabinet decisions Cabinet was briefed on the implementation of Section 100 (1)
intervention in Limpopo province and approved the transition of the intervention from section 100 (1)
to section 100 (1)
with clear conditions given to the Provincial Executive to fulfil as a pre-requisite, for determining full withdrawal.
In line with the Constitution the National Council of Provinces has been consulted.
A separate briefing that will spell out what was achieved and the process going forward will be held early next week.
Cabinet approved the 2014-2019 Medium-Term Strategic Framework (MTSF) which will serve as the first 5-year building block towards the 2030 vision in the National Development Plan (NDP).
The MTSF contains detailed five year implementation plans for the NDP, with targets, indicators, roles and responsibilities and timeframes for the implementation of key actions - to enable systematic and evidence-based monitoring of the implementation of the NDP.
The MTSF builds on government’s experience and learning during the 2009- 2014 administration, when outcomes-based planning, monitoring and evaluation were introduced for the first time.
During that period delivery agreements were developed, monitored and evaluated for the 12 priority outcomes of government which included quality basic education, a long life for all South Africans, safety and security, inclusive growth and decent employment and rural development and land reform.
During the 2014-2019 administration the number of outcomes has been increased to 14, with the addition of two new outcomes - social protection and social cohesion and nation building.
All in all, these 14 outcomes cover all the chapters of the NDThe Ministry of Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation will hold a media briefing on the MTSF shortly.3 Cabinet approved that South Africa hosts the Global Smart Partnership Dialogue in October 2014 under the theme: “Leveraging Science, Technology and Innovation (STI) for Socio-economic.
Transformation through Smart Partnership Principles”.The dialogue provides a platform for Heads of States, business leaders, scientists, academics and student leaders to exchange ideas and experiences related to science, technology and innovation.
Furthermore the dialogue seeks to boosting socio-economic transformation, development and growth in Africa.
The hosting will also address the aims and objectives of the National Development Plan on improving science and technology for socio-economic transformation in South Africa and on improving our innovative edge in the region, the continent and globally.
Upcoming events President Jacob Zuma will launch Women’s Month at the Union Buildings on 31 July 2014 under the theme: “60th anniversary of the Women’s charter as part of the 20 years of Freedom, Moving Women’s Agenda Forward!” The launch will be joined by the Pan African Parliament which will also pay tribute to the Pan African Women’s Organisation and its role in liberating South African women.
A number of activities are planned for the month of August to celebrate the gains made by South Africa in changing the lives of South African women.
The main event on 9 August will take place in Durban.
The Department of Arts and Culture, as the lead department of Women’s Month, will l also launch the 20 Best Moments for Women during August.
These key events mark achievements by exceptional local women and the gains made by all South African women.
The details of these events will be announced in due course.2 President Jacob Zuma is scheduled to lead a delegation to participate in the United States-Africa Leaders’ Summit, under the theme: “Investing in the Next Generation”, from 5 to 6 August 2014.
The summit is expected to bring US and African business executives together to discuss investment and business opportunities in Africa.
There will also be side meetings for American and African Chief Executive Officers (CEOs) and an African Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA) Ministerial Meeting.
These meetings are aimed at strengthening relations between United States and Africa particularly on trade and investment.
The envisaged outcomes are: the encouragement of regional integration on the continent support for various African Union economic development programmes, peace and security, including the extension of AGOA climate change and environment protection issues and assistance to meet the Africa 2063 vision goals.3 The Department of Science and Technology will launch the National Science Week (NSW) on 2 August 2014 under the theme: “Today’s science, tomorrow’s world”.
The NSW 2014 will continue until 9 August 2014 across the country.
During that week there will be a number of science activities throughout the country.
These will entail exhibitions, science shows, workshops and lectures.
Details of the activities will be announced in due course.
Cabinet calls on parents, teachers, learners and South Africans in general to be part of the National Science Week Appointments Cabinet noted the extension of the term of office for the following members to the National Lotteries Board, while the process to appoint the third licensee is being concluded.
a) ProfNtshengedzeni Alfred Nevhutanda (Chairperson),b) Ms Mathukana Mokoka,c) ProfGovin Reddy,d) Ms Zodwa Paulina Ntuli (the dti representative), ande) Ms Ndileka Eumera Portia Loyilane.2 Cabinet approved the appointment of the following Non-Executive Directors to the Board of the South African Maritime Safety Authority (SAMSA).
a) Vice Admiral Johannes Mudimu (Chairperson),b) Dr Michael Harry Hendricks,c) Adv Motsehoa Brenda Madumise (Deputy Chairperson),d) Mr Frederick Andrew Jacobs,e) Ms Nomsa Margaret Cele, andf) Mr Brett Naidoo.3 Cabinet approved the appointment of the following Non-Executive Directors to the Board of the Passenger Rail Agency of South Africa (PRASA).
a) Ms Zodwa Penelope Manase,b) Dr Popo Molefe (Chairperson),c) Ms Carol (Roskruge) Cele,d) Mr William Solomon Steenkamp,e) Ms Nonduduzo Samukeliswe Kheswa,f) Ms Mashila Jemina Matlala,g) Mr Sfiso Buthelezi (re-appointment),h) Mr Xolile George (re-appointment as SALGA Nominee),i) Mr Landon McMillan (National Treasury representative), andj) Mr Clement Manyungwana (Department of Transport representative).4 Cabinet concurred with the appointment of the new members for the Council for the Built Environment.
Department of Public Works representativea) Mr Sam Themba (Clive) Mtshisa,	Infrastructure Departments representativesb) Mr Zukile C Mvalo,c) Ms Martina Mapula Tshangela,d) Ms Itumeleng Sizwe Kgomo,	Built Environment Profssional Councils representativese) Ms Christina Alida Breed,f) Ms Ancunel Anna-Lucia Steyn,g) ProfKathleen Anne Michell,h) Mr Thembinkosi Matunda,i) Ms Ezodidi Gugu Makongwana,j) Mr Jerry Leigh Margolius,k) Ms Anna-Marie Sassenberg,l) Dr Zwanani Titus Mathe,m) Mr Nicolaas Daniel Lombard,n) Mr Sithiwe Thubane,o) Mr Douglas Michell,p) Mr Isaac Mzumara Nkosi (Chairperson),	Public representativesq) Ms Niniza Fortunate Sithole (Deputy Chairperson),r) Adv (Dr) Nalini Maharaj,s) Adv Derick Jeffrey Block, andt) Mr Reginald Gaolatlhe Sefotlho.
Cabinet concurred with the appointment of the following members for the Construction Industry Development Board.
a) Ms Lindelwa Teresa Myataza (Chairperson),b) Mr Christopher Siphiwe Jiyane (Deputy Chairperson),c) Ms Nazreen Sekao Pandor,d) Mr Gonasagran Maduray,e) Ms Nomsa Jacobs – Skweyiya,f) Mr Sipho Abednego Mosai,g) Mr Lefadi Lucas Makibinyane,h) Ms Natalie Carol Skeepers,i) Mr Selaelo Michael Makhura,j) Ms Vuyiswa Victoria Sidzumo,k) Ms Mandisa Fatyela-Lindie,l) Mr Hareesh Lakha Patel, andm) Mr Nico Maas.
Cabinet approved the appointment of the following Non-Executive Directors to the Board of the Development Bank of Southern Africa (DBSA).
a) Ms Busisiwe Abigail Mabuza (re-appointment),b) Dr Lungile Ntombifuthi Nokuthula Bhengu-Baloyi (re-appointment),c) Ms Mary Vilakazi (re-appointment),d) Ms Dawn Marole (re-appointment),e) Ms Gugu Mtetwa,f) Mr Mabotha Arthur Moloto,g) Ms Anuradha Sing,h) ProfMark Swilling.
Enquiries:Phumla Williams, Acting Cabinet SpokespersonCell: 083 501 0139
