1. Recent attacks on foreign nationals1.1. Cabinet welcomes the peace and calm that has begun to prevail in communities that were affected by the recent attacks on foreign nationals.   Cabinet commended the departments that worked through the National Joint Operation Centre to stop the acts of violence that took place in KwaZulu-Natal and Gauteng.1.2. Cabinet commended the provincial and municipal leaders in affected areas for their role in providing relief and leading the process of reintegration of foreign nationals into communities.1.3. In the past week, President Jacob Zuma convened stakeholder meetings with the representatives of business, religious group, labour, civil society and foreign nationals. The engagements were constructive to assist in taking the process forward. All participants were unanimous in expressing their condemnation of these attacks and committed to work with government in finding a lasting solution.1.4. The recently appointed Inter-Ministerial Committee (IMC) on Migration is working to find a lasting solution to issues raised by communities and foreign nationals.2. Key Cabinet decisions2.1. Cabinet was briefed on the progress made on the Immovable Asset Register of the National Government. A Real Estate Registry Services Division has been established with effect from 1 April 2015. The division will be managed within the Property Management Trading Entity and will oversee State immovable assets. It will serve as a single repository of State immovable assets, and will provide an oversight, regulatory and monitory structure the State Immovable Asset Register.2.2. Cabinet approved the release of the Draft Policy on the Customary Practice of Initiation for public comment. The policy seeks to protect, promote and regulate initiation by proposing acceptable norms and standards and also provide for structures at national and provincial level. It will ensure the initiations take place in a controlled environment.This forms part of the steps that government is taking to reinforce appropriate, acceptable customs practices and restore an acceptable level of accountability that sustained the practice over many years.2.3. Cabinet approved the intergovernmental Human Settlement Programme for the Nelson Mandela Bay Municipality which will use the Housing Development Agency as the implementing agent.2.4. Cabinet approved the hosting of the International Federation of Library Associations and Institutions  Annual World Library Information Congress in Cape Town from 15 to 21 August 2015 under the theme "Dynamic Libraries: Access, Development and Transformation".2.5. Cabinet approved the tabling of the Protocol to Eliminate Illicit Trade on Tobacco Products. This is in accordance with the World Health Organization Framework Convention on Tobacco Control which South Africa ratified in April 2005. The protocol will assist countries to take global action against the illicit trade in tobacco products especially on countries that are signatories to the Protocol.3. Cabinet’s position on current issues3.1. Cabinet expressed its condolences to the families of those who died in recent public transport accidents which included a collision of two busses in Johannesburg last week and a collision of trains this week at Denver Station south of Johannesburg. Cabinet is confident the investigation by the relevant departments will establish the causes of these accidents and ensure such accident do not happen.3.2. Cabinet joins President Zuma in conveying its condolences to the family, friends and entire football fraternity on the passing of former Bafana Bafana football legend John “Shoes” Moshoeu who was buried on Monday, 27 April 2015. He will always be remembered as a supremely talented footballer who played a central role in our triumph at the 1996 Africa Cup of Nations.3.3. Cabinet joins President Zuma in conveying condolences to the Government and people of the Federal Democratic Republic of Nepal, following a massive earthquake on Saturday, 25 April 2015, that claimed thousands of lives. Cabinet commends the South African non-governmental organizations who have already dispatched humanitarian aid to Nepal.3.4. Cabinet expressed its deepest condolences to the family of Brigadier General Bita who died at the age of 75 in Tanzania. Brig-Gen Bita served as the Executive Secretary of the Liberation Committee of the then Organization of African Unity (OAU). He was the recipient of the Order of the Companions of OR Tambo in Gold, the highest honor that South Africa bestows on foreign nationals.4. Upcoming events4.1. President Zuma will attend the 70th Anniversary of the Victory of the Great Patriotic War (World War II) at Red Square in Moscow on 9 May 2015. He will also have a bilateral engagement with Russian President Vladimir Putin.This visit will build on our current bilateral relations with the Russian Federation to further advance cooperation in a number of fields.4.2. In the celebration of Workers’ Day tomorrow (1st May 2015), Cabinet calls on all workers to unite and build South Africa’s economy, and contribute to the continent and the world.Since 1994 government has advanced workers’ rights which resulted in workers benefitting from the generation of progressive labour and social protection benefits.4.3. National departments will present their budget votes to Parliament between 5th and 21st May 2015 to highlight their priority activities for the current financial year.Cabinet calls on South Africans to follow the budget votes on various media platforms to better understand when Ministers outline plans for Governments Programme of Action (PoA).4.4. The Department of Tourism and South African Tourism will hold INDABA 2015 from 9 to 11 May 2015 at the Inkosi Albert Luthuli International Convention Centre in Durban.This Pan-African event is a critical platform to promote our tourism products to the international market. It also supports the strategic vision of the National Tourism Sector Strategy to grow international arrivals to 15 million by 2020 and therefore create 225 000 new jobs.4.5. Cabinet welcomes the 5th Gender Summit Africa, the first to be held on the African continent. The summit took taking at the Cape Town International Convention Centre. The summit is a platform for groups and organizations across all levels of scientific research to address gender issues of mutual concern.   The summit hosted by the Human Sciences Research Council strengthens Africa’s research agenda so that science, technology, infrastructure, capital, skills and data can better support the development of the continent.4.6. The Department of Water and Sanitation will mark Sanitation and Hygiene Week from 11 to 15 May 2015 under the theme “It’s not all about flushing”.The week, which was first introduced at the Global WASH Forum held in Dakar, Senegal in 2004, aims to raise awareness on the importance of sanitation and promotes sanitation best practices.Since 1994 government has made great strides in the provision of access to water and sanitation. Since September 2013, the Department of Water and Sanitation has eradicated the use of 14 386 buckets countrywide. Government remains committed to completely eradicate the backlog of the bucket system in our communities.5. AppointmentsAll appointments are subject to the verification of qualifications and the relevant clearance.5.1 Precious Matsotso – Renewed five years contract of Director- General (DG): Department of Health5.2 Mr Thabane Zulu - Extension Contract for 12 months renewable: Director General: Human Settlement.5.3 Non-executive members to the South African Tourism Board:a) Mr Vincent Zwelibanzi Mntambo (reappointment);b) Mr Graham Ian Wood (reappointment);c) Dr. Ayanda Ntsaluba (reappointment);d) Ms Charlotte Mary Chichi Machichana Maponya;e) Mr Oregan Percival Mark Hoskins;f) Dr Tanya Ethel Abrahamse;g) Dr Iraj Abedian;h) Ms Monhla Wilma Hlahla;i) Ms Michelle Julie Constant;j) Ms Judy Valerie Nwokedi;k) Mr Aloysius Thebeetsile Ikalafeng (reappointment);l) Mr Colin Geoffrey Bell;m) Ms Amor Malan;n) Ms Mmaditonki SetwabaSouth African Council for Natural Scientific Professions:a) Dr Gerda Botha (reappointment);b) Dr Stephanus Esias Terblanche;c) Prof K A Nephawe;d) Mr Neale Lance Baartjes;e) Prof George Johannes Bredenkamp;f) Prof Robin Michael Crewe;g) Prof Brian Kevin Reilly (reappointment);h) Dr Juanita van Heerden;i) Dr Jacqueline Suzanne Galpin;j) Dr Roelof Coetzer;k) Dr Irvy Gledhill;l) Mr Khangwelo Desmond Musetsho;m) Dr Monde Mayekiso;n) Mr Fhatuwani Leonard Ramagwede;o) Dr Phethiwe Matutu;p) Dr Philia Rixongile Vukea;q) Prof Mairam Gulumian;r) Mr Poobalan Troy Govender;s) Dr Wendy Ngoma;t) Ms Thulisile Njapa Mashanda; andu) Ms Matuloe Pertunia Masemola.Enquiries:Ms Phumla Williams (Acting Cabinet Spokesperson)Cell: 083 501 0139 
