Implementation of key government programmes.
Cabinet reiterates President Jacob Zuma’s call for all sectors of society to work together to support the economy and save jobs in the current tough economic environment.
The pact between government, mining houses and labour unions demonstrates the commitment across all sectors to save jobs and reduce the impact of job losses.
Cabinet calls on all South Africans to rally behind the implementation of the agreement.
The pact serves as a blueprint for all sectors that face hurdles to save jobs.2 Cabinet received the Quarterly Outcomes Reports for the period 1 April to 30 June 2015.
Cabinet is pleased with the progress made and has also noted areas that require intervention.
The GCIS will be coordinating media briefings in order to share information on implementation of government programmes.
This schedule will be communicated at a later stage.3 Cabinet received a briefing on the G20 meeting held in Ankara, Turkey from 3 to 5 September 2015.
The meeting was attended by the Ministers of Finance and Labour and the Governor of the South African Reserve Bank.
A joint meeting of Ministers of Finance and Labour discussed strategies to deliver more and better jobs, reduce inequality and support inclusive growth.4 The meeting of the Ministers of Finance and Governors of the Central Banks focused on, among other things, the global economy a framework for sustainable and balanced growth investment and infrastructure international tax issues , financing for development, and climate change.
Cabinet noted that the global growth is falling short of expectations.
However, Cabinet welcomed the renewed pledge by the G20 to continue to monitor developments, assess spillovers and address emerging risks as needed to foster confidence and financial stability.
The G20 also welcomed the positive outcome of the Addis Ababa Conference on Financing for Development in which South Africa played a critical role as chair of the G77 plus China.5 Cabinet welcomes the inauguration and electricity switch-on of the Kouga Wind Farm in the Eastern Cape on 4 September 2015.The Kouga Wind Farm will provide about 300 gigawatt-hours of clean electricity annually.
This will, supply an average of 50 000 households.
It is part of the country’s plan to diversify towards a more sustainable energy supply.
Earlier this year, the Department of Energy expanded opportunities for the private sector to contribute to the production of power by approving 13 new renewable Independent Power Producers that will add 5 243 megawatts to the national grid.6 Cabinet has noted the migration developments in Europe which highlight the complexity of the migration management and its relationship with foreign policies of the respective countries.
South Africa has consistently tried to handle issues of migration as humane as possible.
The migration crisis in Europe is a regional challenge that requires the collective effort of individual states.
The active participation of and close collaboration with societies, communities and civil society organizations is needed to deal with migration issues.7 Cabinet commends the work of the Municipal Demarcation Board (MDB) which recently completed the determination and redetermination of the outer boundaries of municipalities in eight provinces across the country.
The MDB performed its work in accordance with its legislative mandate and used provisions within its powers to make the final decisions.
Cabinet has expressed deep concern about some political parties which have launched an attack on the MDB that seeks to undermine its independence and legitimacy in the eyes of the public.
Cabinet calls on all political parties to desist from undermining the work of an important independent institution that supports our democracy.
There are other avenues provided in law to challenge the decisions of the MDB.8 The Employment Equity (EE) reporting season opened on 1 September 2015 for both manual and online reporting, which closes on 1 October 2015 (manual) and 15 January 2016 (online) respectively.
Cabinet reminds all employers to submit their EE reports to the Department of Labour .
Such reports assist the country to monitor the progress with regard to address discrimination and equity imbalances.
The Department of Labour is undertaking national roadshows under the theme: “Transformation - makes business sense” to strengthen implementation and ensure compliance.
Key Cabinet decisions.
Cabinet was briefed on the final Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) Close-out Report for South Africa.
Cabinet approved the draft close-out report on the MDG that will be presented to the United Nations later this year.
According to the report, after 20 years of development, significant progress has been made in national coverage of essential services and reducing extreme poverty levels.
However, South Africa continues to face the triple challenges of poverty, inequality and unemployment.
The report charts the path to a more effective post-2015 development agenda and the associated sustainable development goals.
Cabinet approved the recommendation by the Minister of Transport to provide urgent lease agreement to the Tag Yachts (PTY) Ltd .
Its objective is to initiate manufacturing of high end composite catamarans in the Port Elizabeth Habour.
This is to effect the assigned responsibility for the marine manufacturing Delivery Unit under the Operation Phakisa initiatives to establish a composite Boat-Building Cluster in the Eastern Cape.
The approval is in terms of Urgent Section 57 of the National Ports Act, 2005 (Act 12 of 2005).
Cabinet approved the submission of the African Charter on Statistics to Parliament for ratification.
The charter is a policy framework for the development of statistics in Africa, which sets out the professional principles governing the production and management of statistics at national, regional and continental levels.
Statistics are the bedrock for effective monitoring and evaluation, and ensure that objectives are achieved and outcomes are met.
The charter provides guidelines for the production of good quality statistics needed to monitor the NDP, and government programmes and priorities.
Cabinet approved that the Department of Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation (DPME) takes forward the Twende Mbele Programme in order to invest in collaboration around monitoring and evaluation across Africa.
The Twende Mbele Programme will assist South Africa to build on and formalise existing informal partnerships, which may include bilateral agreements.
This supports the struggle for a better life in South Africa, which is linked with the pursuit of a better Africa in a better world.
Bills.
Cabinet approved the submission of the Extension of Security of Tenure Amendment Bill, 2015 to Parliament.
The Bill amends the Extension of Security of Tenure Act, 1997 (Act 62 of 1997) so as to strengthen, clarify and protect the rights of occupiers.
The amendments, which are from the Land Tenure Security and Evictions Policies in Commercial Framing Areas, aim to find a solution to tenure insecurities by combining land redistribution measures within effective legal protection and dispute-resolution mechanisms.
Existing institutional arrangements and capacities have not been sufficient to address the quality and scale of land-rights conflicts and tenure securities found in commercial farming areas.
Upcoming events.
As part of Heritage Month celebrations in September, President Jacob Zuma will unveil the Matola Memorial and Interpretative Centre in Mozambique on Friday, 11 September 2015, and the Chief Bhambhatha Sculpture in Greytown, KwaZulu-Natal on 22 September 2015.
The President will also deliver a keynote address on Heritage Day in Vleifontein Machado in Limpopo on 24 September 2015.
The theme for this year’s Heritage Month celebration is: “Our indigenous knowledge, our heritage: Towards the identification, promotion and preservation of South Africa’s living heritage.”South Africans are encouraged to explore our natural heritage by visiting national parks which will offer free entrance from 14 to 18 September 2015, as part of the 10th annual South African National Parks Week.
The Department of Basic Education will conduct the fifth Annual National Assessments (ANA) during September 2015 to track progress of learning outcomes in literacy and mathematics among grades 1 to 9.The ANA generates standardised evidence for monitoring the progress of government interventions and also guide the development of targeted interventions.
Parents and guardians are encouraged to support learners during the assessment period and to ensure that the results are used to address any development areas.
The ANA timetable for 2015 is on available on: www.
education.
gov.
zaCabinet calls on teachers to put the needs of the learners first by ensuring that the ANA continues uninterrupted.4 Cabinet thanks South Africans who took part in the International Literacy Day that took place on 8 September 2015 to encourage the culture of reading and promote the importance of literacy.
Our founding documents of this Democracy the Freedom Charter stated that we will strive for “the doors of learning shall be open to all.
The Department of Basic Education appeal during this month for all South Africans to participate in a literacy campaign that seek to encourage reading in our communities.
Cabinet calls on every one to donate books to school libraries, contribute our times to go an read for children in our communities.
The National Annual Thusong Service Centre Week from 13 to 18 September 2015 will profile the services of the centres and mobile units in bringing government services closer to South Africans.
This forms part of Public Service Month.
Cabinet encourages South Africans to use the variety of services and information offered by the Thusong Service Centres to advance and empower themselves.
Cabinet calls on South Africans to honour exceptional public servants or government institutions by nominating them before 30 September 2015 for the 3rd National Batho Pele Excellence Awards 2015, which will take place under the theme: “Batho Pele – Putting People First”.
More information is available on: www.
dpsa.
gov.
za.5 Cabinet noted that the 70th Regular Session of the UN General Assembly (UNGA 70) will open on 15 September 2015 at the UN Headquarters in New York.
From 25-27 September 2015.
The Summit will consider the Adoption of the Post-2015 Development Agenda will convene.
The General Debate of the 70th Session of the UNGA will take place from 28 September - 6 October 2015.
The last AU Summit held in South Africa called on all AU member states to take advantage of the UN General Assembly platform to include the issue of the Security Council reform among their foreign policy priorities in their engagements with non-African partners in particular, to include in their statements during the debates of the United Nations General Assembly, the need to correct the historical injustice on the African continent.6 Cabinet noted that South Africa will host the 2nd Summit of the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation (FOCAC) on 04-05 December 2015.
The South African Government will be working closely with the Government of China, the African Group of Ambassadors in Beijing and Addis Ababa, and the AU Commission on the preparations leading up to the FOCAC Summit.
It is expected that the FOCAC Summit will adopt a new Declaration and Plan of Action (2016-2018).
South Africa is currently engaging all parties in preparing these two key outcome documents.
Congratulatory messages.7 Cabinet welcomes the announcement by the Commonwealth Games Federation General Assembly that Durban will host the 2022 Commonwealth Games, making it the first time that this prestigious event will take place on African WEBTOKEN will make use of the FIFA 2010 World Cup infrastructure to host the event, which is expected to deliver up to R20 billion to the economy, translating into an additional R11 billion gross domestic product growth.8 Cabinet congratulates our athletes for ending 13th at the 15th World Championships in Athletics in Beijing, China and winning one gold and two bronze medals.9 Cabinet also wishes to congratulate Bafana Bafana for winning the 21st edition of the Mandela Challenge, beating Senegal 1-0.
The victory follows the loss to Mauritania over the weekend and we hope that this will boost the confidence of the team to qualify for the African Cup of WEBTOKEN winning the Mandela Challenge, the South African Football Association increased their donation to the Nelson Mandela Children’s Fund from R1 million to R1, 5 million.10 Cabinet wishes the Springbok squad well in the 8th Rugby World Cup hosted by England from 18 September to 31 October 2015 and calls on South Africans to unite behind our national team.11 Cabinet joins the President in congratulating the University of Witwatersrand on the major new fossil discoveries at Maropeng in the Cradle of Humankind World Heritage Site in the West Rand, Gauteng.
This new remarkable discovery follows intensive research by the scientists under the auspices of the Department of Science and Technology and the National Research Foundation Centre of Excellence at the University of Witwatersrand.12 Cabinet joins the President in congratulating the congregation of the Catholic Church for formal recognition of Mr Tshimangadzo Samuel Benedict Daswa as the first Saint in South Africa.
The ceremony will take place on 13 September 2015 in Thohoyandou, Limpopo, the Catholic Church will hold ceremony at which Mr Tshimangadzo Samuel Benedict Daswa.
Daswa was a school principal in the Limpopo province.
He was beaten, stoned and burnt to death for his Catholic beliefs in February 1990.
Key issues in the environment.
Cabinet welcomed the proposed intensions between the Road Traffic Management Corporation and provincial traffic authorities to introduce a 24-hour shift for traffic officers to address the carnage on our roads.
Cabinet reminds all road users that road safety is everyone’s responsibility and the success of road-safety campaigns depends on all people obeying the rules of the road.
As we enter the schools holiday season, the Department of Transport will heighten its road safety campaign.
Cabinet calls on motorist to stop the carnage on our roads by respecting the road signs, motorists not to drive whilst under the influence of alcohol, unroadworthy vehicles should not be on our roads.
Cabinet has noted the XIV World Forestry currently taking place in Durban and attended by 3 200 delegates.
The congress, the first to be held in Africa, includes people representing different sectors such as government, non-governmental organisations, private sector, and scientific or professional bodies.
The broad participation and inclusive discussion on forestry issues will facilitate their mainstreaming in global agendas on sustainable development and building new partnerships.
Cabinet has noted the statement issued by the US Diplomatic Mission to South Africa warning that extremists may target American interests in South Africa.
Cabinet reiterates the department of the Minister of State Security assures the public that the safety of all South Africans remains the priority.
Our law enforcement agencies remain vigilant to protect its residents and their property.
Condolences.
Cabinet joins President Zuma in conveying condolences to the family, friends and colleagues on the passing of Justice Thembile Lewis Skweyiya.
He made a tremendous contribution to the country as an anti-apartheid lawyer, human rights activist, High Court Judge and Justice of the Constitutional Court.
Cabinet also sends its condolences to the family and subjects of his Majesty, King Lekunutu Cavendish Mota of Batlokwa ba Mota in the Free State.
AppointmentsAll appointments are subject to the verification of qualifications and the relevant clearance.
Ms Mmabatho Ramagoshi – Deputy Director-General: Policy Coordination and Knowledge Management at the Department of Women.
National Head: Directorate for Priority Crime Investigation.
The Minister of Police will make the announcement this afternoonEnquiries:Ms Phumla Williams (Acting Cabinet Spokesperson)Contact: 083 501 0139
