A. Issues in the environment1. Presidential Summit on Gender-Based Violence and Femicide (GBVF)1.1.  Cabinet welcomed the hosting of the second Presidential Summit on GBVF at the Gallagher Estate in Midrand, Gauteng on 1 and 2 November 2022 under the theme: “Accountability, Acceleration and Amplification, NOW!” 1.2.  The summit reflected on progress made in the implementation of declarations proposed during the 2018 Presidential Summit, which reaffirmed the country’s commitment to a united, comprehensive and effective response to GBVF. 1.3.  Participants at the two-day summit accounted for work being done towards the implementation of the National Strategic Plan (NSP) on GBVF, which aims to provide a multi-sectoral, coherent strategic policy and programming framework to strengthen a coordinated national response to the crisis of GBVF by the government and country as a whole. 1.4.  The summit was the ideal platform to engage in honest and robust discussions around successes and challenges in the fight against GBVF. It also showcased the need for collective action and how significant success can be achieved if adequate resources are provided and managed correctly.1.5.  The agreements reached at the summit have demonstrated the importance of the partnership that government has forged with civil society, business, development partners, the faith-based sector and other sectors to work together to deal with the scourge of GBVF. 1.6.  Some of the interventions agreed upon included the need to allocate adequate funding to the NSP on GBVF, to implement consequence management mechanisms to ensure accountability, and to strengthen national, provincial and local accountability structures. 1.7.  Cabinet reiterated that all acts of violence and abuse will not be tolerated in our society. Communities are urged to tackle the scourge of GBVF head-on by reporting perpetrators to law-enforcement agencies. Each sector of our society must play its part by creating conditions that make it difficult, if not impossible, for GBVF to thrive.2.    Safety and security  2.1.  Cabinet has reassured the public that the National Joint Operational and Intelligence Structure (NATJOINTS) – which comprises various government departments led by the State Security Agency, South African Police Service and South African National Defence Force – has an intelligence-driven capacity to deal with threats to our national security, including terrorism.2.2.  Through NATJOINTS, the security of the country is assessed regularly for any possible security threat. As part of the cooperation agreements with other intelligence agencies from other countries, South Africa also benefits from the exchange of relevant intelligence information that can ensure the safety of the nation. 2.3.  Cabinet calls on the public to remain vigilant and to report any suspicious and illegal activities to law enforcement agencies. Do not keep quiet; if you see something, say something – together we can keep the nation safe.3.  2022 Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement (MTBPS)3.1.  Cabinet welcomed the bold measures introduced in the 2022 MTBPS to restore the health of our public finances, just as the world economy is taking a dangerous turn for the worse. 3.2.  The steps announced by Finance Minister Enoch Godongwana in Parliament, Cape Town on Wednesday, 26 October 2022, included narrowing our budget deficit greatly to improve our fiscal framework, support our economic standing and give South Africans every confidence in the future prospects of our economy.3.3. The planned increase in contingency reserves allows us to deal with emergencies such as natural disasters. The 2022 MTBPS further boosts our key priorities of infrastructure and service-delivery programmes, and provides additional relief to support the poor and vulnerable in our nation. 3.4.  Cabinet calls on all socio-economic sectors to partner with the government to uplift our economy to improve the lives of our citizens across the country.4.   South Africa – Spain relations4.1.  Cabinet welcomed the outcome of the Official Visit to South Africa by Prime Minister Pedro Sánchez Pérez-Castejón of Spain to solidify the already strong relations between the two countries. The Prime Minister was accompanied by the Spanish Minister for Industry, Trade and Tourism, Ms Reyes Maroto, and a business delegation.4.2.  The visit created opportunities for various South African sectors to meet with their Spanish counterparts and to deepen cooperation in trade and investment, science and innovation, arts and culture, sports and education.  This visit provided another boost to the country’s investment and economic growth drive.5.  Ethiopia – Tigray Peace Talks5.1. South Africa, under the auspices of the African Union, hosted formal peace talks between the warring sides in the conflict in Ethiopia's Tigray region, from 25 to 30 October 2022. 5.2.  The dialogue was facilitated by Nigeria’s former President Olusegun Obasanjo, Kenya's former President Uhuru Kenyatta and South Africa's former Deputy President Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka.5.3. Cabinet expressed its support for a peaceful and sustainable solution to the conflict, in line with South Africa’s foreign policy objectives of a secure and conflict-free continent.  B.  Cabinet Decisions1.  National Integrated Small Enterprise Development (NISED) Strategic Framework 1.1.  Cabinet approved the NISED Strategic Framework for implementation. The initial Integrated Strategy for the Promotion of Entrepreneurship and Small Enterprises (ISPESE) was adopted in 2005. The ISPESE and the subsequent NISED give effect to the 1995 White Paper on the National Strategy for the Development and Promotion of Small Business in South Africa.1.2.  The NISED Strategic Framework provides an integrated strategy to strengthen and support entrepreneurship for small and medium-sized enterprises. It provides a structured coordination framework for all key ecosystem role players in small to medium enterprise development.   1.3.  In April this year, Cabinet approved the publication of the draft NISED strategic framework for public comment. Through the wide consultations, the strategy was enhanced by inputs from the public and from the National Economic Development and Labour Council, which is a forum comprising business, civil society, labour, academics and government that seeks to deal with economic, labour and development issues and related challenges facing the country.2.  Draft Policy on Social Development Services to Persons with Disabilities2.1. Cabinet approved the publishing for public comment of the draft Policy on Social Development Services to Persons with Disabilities. The policy gives effect to the White Paper on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the United Nations (UN) Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (UNCPRD).2.2. The policy guides the Department of Social Development in the provision of its services to persons with disabilities and their respective families.2.3.  It outlines the restrictive environment and barriers that continue to marginalise and exclude persons with disabilities from mainstream society, and from participating in social and economic activities. It proposes monitoring mechanisms that will ensure closer tracking of its implementation and mainstream interventions within the relevant departments.2.4.  South Africa is a signatory to the UNCPRD and the African Charter on Human and People’s Rights on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities in Africa. 3.  Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Meeting3.1. The IPCC Bureau will be convening its seventh assessment cycle meeting in June 2023. The IPCC – which comprises a panel of 195-member governments under the UN – is responsible for assessing the available scientific, technical and socio-economic knowledge, so as to advise decision-makers about the causes, impacts and responses to climate change.3.2. During its meeting in 2023, the IPCC is expected to elect a new chairperson for its seventh assessment cycle. Cabinet has endorsed the nomination of Prof Debra Roberts from the University of KwaZulu-Natal for this position.3.3.  Prof Roberts has championed increased IPCC outreach work in Africa. She is currently a member of the IPCC Bureau. If elected she would be the first woman and a person from Africa to chair this body.  Her election will send a positive message on the good work being done by female scientists from Africa. C. Upcoming events1.   2022 16 Days of Activism Campaign 1.1.  South Africa will join the world in participating in the annual 16 Days of Activism against GBV, which kicks off on 25 November, the International Day for the Elimination of Violence against Women, and runs until 10 December, Human Rights Day.1.2.  Cabinet approved this year’s concept and the theme as “Socio-Economic Rights and Empowerment to build women’s resilience against Gender-based violence and Femicide: Connect, Collaborate, Contract”.1.3.  During the 16 Days of Activism for No Violence against Women and Children this year, South Africa will focus its awareness activities on the implementation of the NSP on GBVF. The plan aims to provide a multi-sectoral, coherent strategic policy and programming framework to strengthen a coordinated national response to the crisis of GBVF by the government and the country as a whole.  2.  Disability Rights Awareness Month (DRAM) and National Day of Persons with Disabilities 2.1. Cabinet approved the concept and the theme for the 2022 DRAM and National Day of Persons with Disabilities, which runs from 3 November to 3 December. The theme is: “Empowering Persons with Disabilities through resourceful, sustainable and safe environments”. 2.2.  The theme emphasises the importance of resolving existing barriers affecting people with disabilities. This includes ensuring resourceful, sustainable and safe environments for persons with disabilities, and also recognising that not all disabilities are visible.2.3.  The month-long activities will raise awareness and also showcase the progress the country has made in ensuring the protection of the rights of persons with disabilities, as enshrined in the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa of 1996. The activities will also highlight the need to address challenges experienced by persons with disabilities in the workplace and society.D.  Messages1. Congratulations Cabinet extended its congratulations and well-wishes to:  Edendale Technical Secondary School in KwaZulu-Natal for winning the CAF African School Football Championship.2. Condolences Cabinet expressed condolences to the family and friends of: Mr Jeremy Mansfield (59), a veteran TV and radio personality who had a stellar career, and received numerous awards and accolades.Ms Nelisiwe Magubane (56), the former Director-General of the then Department of Energy (now Department of Mineral Resources and Energy). She was a respected expert in the energy industry.E. AppointmentsAll appointments are subject to the verification of qualifications and security clearance.a.  Major General Siphosihle Thumy Nkosi – Deputy National Head: Directorate for Priority Crime Investigation (DPCI).  b.  Brigadier Nicholaas Jacobus Gerber – Deputy Provincial Head: Mpumalanga DPCI. c. Brigadier Gopaul Govender – Deputy Provincial Head: Limpopo DPCI.  d. Brigadier Stephen Molefi Mabuela – Deputy Provincial Head: Northern Cape DPCI. Board of the National Development Agency: a. Ms Tanya T Smith;b. Chief Livhuwani Matsila;c. Ms Nozabelo Ruth Bhengu;d. Ms Happy Ralinala;e.  Dr Olwethu Sipuka;f.  Mr Thembinkosi Matthews Josopu;g. Ms Sibongile Mncwabe (Department of Higher Education and Training);h. Mr Mojalefa Mohoto (Department of Small Business Development);i.  Ms Rosemary Puleng Lukwago-Mugerwa (Department of Public Works and Infrastructure);j.  Ms Nomthandazo Lichie Moyo (Department of Agriculture, Land Reform and Rural Development); and k.  Mr Pieter Pretorius (Department of Cooperative Governance).Enquiries:Ms Phumla Williams – Cabinet Spokesperson Mobile: 083 501 0139
