A.     CABINET LEKGOTLA 1.1.    President Cyril Ramaphosa convened the Cabinet Lekgotla on Thursday, 27 January 2022. It was attended by the leadership structures representing all spheres of government. They included Ministers, Deputy Ministers, Premiers, Directors-General and leadership of the South African Local Government Association.  1.2.    The President invited the government leaders as part of integrating and aligning government’s responses to challenges facing the country, particularly to focus urgently on addressing the triple challenges of poverty, unemployment and inequality. He called on the leaders to effect fundamental reforms to revive economic growth and create much-needed employment at a far higher rate.1.3.    The President underscored the centrality of Vision 2030 of the National Development Plan and the Economic Reconstruction and Recovery Plan to accelerate efforts to improve the conditions of South Africans.1.4.    In addition to the state of the economy and structural reforms, the Cabinet Lekgotla also discussed infrastructure development, energy security, localisation and industrialisation, land reforms and agriculture, and reform of state-owned enterprises.1.5.    Efforts to reduce unemployment and poverty will include a blend of increased private sector employment, publicly funded employment and expanded social protection for unemployed people.1.6.    The meeting also deliberated on challenges and progress in the fight against crime and corruption, and efforts to enhance public safety and security. It also   discussed local government service delivery – including the provision of electricity, water and sanitation – as an important part of building the capacity of the State.1.7.    The Cabinet Lekgotla deliberations are to inform government’s priorities for the year ahead which President Ramaphosa will set out during the State of the Nation Address on Thursday, 10 February 2022.B.    CABINET DECISIONS1.    SA Connect – Phase 2 Plan1.1.    Cabinet approved the roll-out of the second phase of the SA Connect project. The plan gives effect to the country’s Broadband Policy which was adopted by Cabinet in 2013.  Phase 1 served as a pilot phase to provide 10 Megabits (Mbps) broadband services to about 970 critical government facilities. 1.2.    The approved second phase will be rolled out using state-owned entities (State Information Technology Agency [SITA]); Broadband Infraco and Sentech) and the industry. Over the next 36 months, the project will connect the remaining government facilities, communities and households.1.3.    The project forms part of government’s commitment to bridge the digital divide, especially in rural communities, and advance the digital economy. The participation of the private sector will also address the transformation of the sector by involving all relevant role players in the electronic network sector. 1.4.    The SA Connect project targets to achieve 80% broadband access in communities and government facilities over the next three years with a minimum speed capacity of 10Mbps per second and 100 Mbps for the high-demand facilities.C.    APPOINTMENTS All appointments are subject to the verification of qualifications and the relevant clearance.1.    Ms Nomthandazo Lichie Moyo as Deputy Director-General (DDG): Rural Development at the Department of Agriculture, Land Reform and Rural Development (DALRRD). 2.    Mr Clinton Rossouw Heimann as DDG: Spatial Planning and Land Use Management at the DALRRD.3.    Mr Michael Currin as DDG: Intergovernmental Coordination and Stakeholder Management at the Government Communication and Information System (GCIS). 4.    Ms Regomoditswe Dorcas Mavimbela as DDG: Content Processing and Dissemination at the GCIS. 5.    Ms Nomonde Mnukwa as DDG: Corporate Services at the GCIS. 6.    Mr Nhlanhla Edgar Sishi as DDG: Budget Office in National Treasury.7.    Dr Litha Magingxa as Chief Executive Officer (CEO) and President of the Agricultural Research Council.  Cabinet concurred with Council appointment8.    Ms Rofhiwa Irene Singo as Chief Financial Officer at the Department of Justice and Constitutional Development. 9.    Mr Luvuyo Keyise as an interim CEO of SITA (Reappointed).Board members of SITA SOC:1.    Ms Makano Mosidi (Chairperson);2.    Dr Stella Bvuma (Deputy Chairperson);3.    Ms Shery-Lee Moonsamy;4.    Ms Nolitha Pieterson;5.    Ms Zimbini Hill;6.    Ms Olwethu Ketsekile;7.    Dr Tshilidzi Ratshitanga;8.    Dr Rendani Ramabulana;9.    Ms Jeanette Morwane (Department of Communications and Digital Technologies representative);10.    Ms Laura Mseme (National Treasury representative); and11.    Mr Willie Vukela (Department of Public Service and Administration representative).Enquiries: Ms Phumla Williams – Cabinet Spokesperson Mobile: 083 501 0139
