1. Implementation of Government Programmes. Cabinet supports the commitments made in the 2017 National Budget to advance radical economic transformation and draw more South Africans into the economy towards inclusive growth. In the main the budget acknowledges that growth without transformation would only reinforce the inequitable patterns from the past. Redistribution in support of education, health services and municipal functions in rural areas remains the central thrust of our spending programmes. Procurement reforms continue to improve the effectiveness of public spending and opening opportunities for small business participation. Budget allocations support economic growth and development: R.9 billion for small, medium and micro enterprises and cooperatives R.2 billion for industrial infrastructure in special economic zones and industrial parks R.9 billion for broadband implementation, R.9 billion for the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research, an additional R494 million for tourism promotion, an additional R266m to support the aquaculture sector and realise the goals of the Oceans Economy Phakisa Operation, and spending on agriculture, rural development and land reform amounting to nearly R30 billion by 2019/20.The budget plays a central role in transformation by promoting redistribution and directing scarce resources towards catalytic investments in human and physical capital. In recognition of our need to invest in the future of youth, the budget ensures that financially needy students can access tertiary education. The National Student Financial Aid Scheme (NSFAS) has provided funding to over 300 000 new and returning students to study at universities and Technical and Vocational Education and Training (TVET) colleges across the country in 2017. The fund expects to add a further 100 000 students this year. The R15 billion allocated to NSFAS by government will assist in alleviating the financial burden faced by financially needy and missing middle students. Following the successful launch of Operation Phakisa in sectors such as the Oceans Economy, Health and Basic Education, President Jacob Zuma launched the Operation Phakisa for Agriculture, Land Reform and Rural Development on 24 February 2017. Operation Phakisa is derived from Malaysia’s Big Fast Results methodology which Malaysia used successfully to achieve rapid economic transformation and having been successfully adapted to South African conditions, it now forms part of our Nine Point Plan Implementation toolkit. Operation Phakisa for Agriculture, Land Reform and Rural Development seeks to achieve inclusive growth, as prescribed by the vision of the NDP and aims at contributing to stimulating economic growth, fostering job creation, and transforming the agricultural value chain. It further seeks to ensure equitable access to land, both towards economic development and agrarian transformation. The programme will review existing producer support models and develop finance models aimed at fast tracking land reform, given the urgent need for government to make progress in food security. Furthermore, the programme seeks to address constraints in ensuring equitable access to land, both towards economic development and agrarian transformation. These include land reform, rural development, labour, grains, livestock, horticulture and producer support. In 2016, over 10 million tourist arrivals were recorded in South Africa, a 13 per cent increase from 2015. Our thriving tourism industry is testament to the close collaboration between government, organised labour and business led by the Department of Tourism together with South African Tourism to unlock the full economic benefits of our tourism assets. We call on all industry partners to continue developing and promoting tourism so that it may benefit local communities through jobs and infrastructure development. As part of Government focus to unlock the potential of SMME’s and township enterprises, South Africa will host the Global Entrepreneurship Congress between the 13 and16 March 2017 in Johannesburg. The congress is an inter-disciplinary gathering of start-up champions that attracts 4 000 delegates from more than 150 countries. Thought-leaders, entrepreneurs, investors, researchers and policymakers who have become part of a global movement that advances entrepreneurship as a means to build economies and improve human welfare, will attend. This is the first time the congress will be hosted in Africa and provides an opportunity for South Africa and the rest of the continent to ignite its entrepreneurial spirit. South Africa commemorated the start of Human Rights Month on 1 March 2017 under the theme: “The Year of OR Tambo: Unity in Action in Advancing Human Rights” to raise awareness and promote respect for basic human rights. Human Rights Month will be celebrated across the country leading to the national celebrations on Human Rights Day on 21 March 2017 in Ginsberg, King William’s Town in the Eastern Cape. On the day, President Jacob Zuma will officially handover the memorial grave site of Steve Bantu Biko to the Biko-family. This is part of celebrating and promoting unity in line with the vision of OR Tambo. Cabinet also noted the outcome of the Competition Commission investigation into alleged foreign exchange collusion and awaits the conclusion of the Competition Tribunal proceedings, including its findings and decision on the appropriate sanction. As we commemorate National Water Month in March 2017 under the theme: “Human Rights for Water and Sanitation”, all South Africans are reminded to conserve water to ensure sustainability of future supply. Cabinet was briefed on the proposal by the United Nations Educational Scientific and Cultural Organisation (UNESCO) to host World Water Day in South Africa on 22 March 2017 under the theme: “Waste Water the untapped resource”.President Jacob Zuma who is a member of the United Nations High Level Panel on Water Action Plan will open the event, by launching the World Water Development Report 2017 on wastewater and related activities. Cabinet welcomes the progress made on the distribution of animal feeds to support farmers in the country’s drought affected areas. The initiative is part of the R212 million in support, which government has made available in 2016/17 to assist affected farmers across the country. Provinces have also made R198 million available through equitable share funding, and funds from the Prevention and Mitigation of Disaster Risk programme were used to drill boreholes and construct fire breaks. In order to assist with the difficulties with regard to water availability in the Western Cape, attempts need to be instituted to provide greater comfort in the form of additional alternate water supply sources that must be on standby should inadequate water be received for this WEBTOKEN further curb excessive water use, the Department of Water and Sanitation has informed the agricultural sector of 10% additional water restrictions. The water restrictions will remain until the dams fill up to 85% of their capacity. As the country welcomes the much needed rains which will go a long way in relieving the country from the effects of drought, dams and rivers are showing signs of increasing volumes. The possibility of flash flooding remains high. We call on communities to remain vigilant of flash flooding which could lead to the loss of life, destruction to property and infrastructure. Government and its agencies are actively monitoring the situation and are ready to act where necessary. President Jacob Zuma will deliver his annual address to the National House of Traditional Leaders on 3 March 2017.Emanating from the Address a Programme of Action will be developed and implemented by the House and the Department of Traditional Affairs. The official opening of the house will also celebrate 20 years since it was constituted. President Jacob Zuma will lead a South African government delegation to the SADC Extraordinary Summit on 18 March 2017, in the Kingdom of Swaziland. SADC continues to serve as the primary vehicle for South Africa’s foreign policy to achieve regional development and integration within our WEBTOKEN is expected that the Summit will deliberate on, amongst other things, the state of peace and security in the region, with particular focus on the developments in the Kingdom of Lesotho and the Democratic Republic of Congo and the implementation of the Revised Regional Indicative Strategic Plan. South Africa as the incoming Chair of SADC is scheduled to host the next SADC Ordinary Summit in August 2017. On 8 March President Jacob Zuma will undertake an official State Visit to Indonesia. Both South Africa and Indonesia are one of the largest economies in their respective regions, and endowed with rich natural and maritime resources. This will be preceded by the Leaders' Summit of the Indian Ocean RIM Association (IORA) from 6 to 7 March 2017, which will also commemorate IORA's 20th anniversary. At that Summit, President Widodo will hand over the chairship of IORA to South Africa. South Africa and Indonesia are both founding members of IORA, which comprises 21 coastal states of the Indian Ocean. South Africa served as Vice Chair from 2015 to early 2017 and will serve as Chair from 2017 to Cabinet decisions. Cabinet approved the gazetting of the draft Mine Water Management Policy for public comment. Mine Water Management, including Acid Mine Drainage, remains a major environmental challenge. The Policy provides the basis for holding parties potentially liable for negative effects and damages of Acid Mine Drainage related pollution and/or any other negative impacts that can be related to it. The policy also seeks to propose mechanisms that mining houses should explore to better manage their water. Cabinet was briefed on the progress report of the Inter-Ministerial Committee for the Revitalisation of Distressed Mining Communities’ implementation of relevant findings from its Australian Mining Industry Benchmarking Study tour of 24 to 28 August 2015.The study tour was premised on the Rapid Appraisal of the Policy and Regulatory Systems Governing the Mining Sector which compared the policy and legislative frameworks governing the mining sector as well as the practices of mining companies in Australia, Chile, South Africa and Zambia. Highlights of progress include partnerships between government and mining companies in delivering decent housing and living conditions for mine workers and community members A review of mining companies water treatment plants is being conducted to assess the possibility of infrastructure partnerships. The development of mining towns spatial transformation plans has been finalised for five municipalities. Catalytic economic development projects are being implemented in labour sending areas, with an emphasis on the advancement of the agriculture sector in mining communities and fast tracking of increased access to medical assessments for ex-mineworkers, community members and current mineworkers. Cabinet approved for the Departments of Labour and Mineral Resources to study the different Australian mine commuting models to assist long haul South African migrant mineworkers to commute home more frequently. Cabinet also approved for the Department of Health work closely with the Department of Mineral Resources and other partners in the provision of supportive services to ex-mineworkers in dealing with occupational diseases, with a view to reducing and preventing mine related occupational health challenges. A request was made for the Department of Human Settlements to fast track the implementation of integrated human settlements projects in collaboration with mining companies. Cabinet approved the improvement plan based on the findings and recommendations of the synthesis evaluation of whether the provision of state subsidised housing has addressed asset poverty for households and local municipalities. Over 3 million houses have been provided through the government housing programme. million of the houses are delivered through the capital subsidy which confers individual ownership of a free standing house to households earning less than R3500 per month. Evidence affirms housing as an important component of the social wage package and households’ safety net. Cabinet approved the report on the Implementation Evaluation of the Funza Lushaka Bursary Programme as well as the Management Response and Improvement from the Department of Basic Education. This was part of the 2014/15 National Evaluation Plan. Cabinet approved that the Department of Basic Education retains the Programme which was established in 2007 to increase the supply of competent teachers specialising in priority areas. The Department will also consider the expansion and supplementation of the Programme. Empirical evidence shows that the design of the Programme is relevant in terms of its political, economic and social context. It is also largely appropriate in terms of the complex environment in which it is implemented. The Programme has implemented continuous improvements in its strategy, including the introduction of a district-based recruitment system in 2012. It has made an important contribution to a substantial increase in enrolment in initial teacher education. Cabinet was briefed on the Disability Index Framework and approved the piloting of the Disability Inequality Index. Cabinet also supports the government-wide disaggregation of all data sets in terms of gender, disability and age. The Disability Inequality Index is a key tool for tracking inequality between persons with disabilities and persons without disabilities, and provides a strategic high level quick scan on the measurement of the inequality gap. This assists in targeting government interventions more inclusively. The process of disaggregation will enable timeous responses by government to the experiences of compounded vulnerabilities. The Policy alignments and improvements on their own, cannot reduce these inequalities, without a systematic and consistent measurement of the inequality gap. Cabinet approved the Policy for Social Service Practitioners, 2016. The overarching outcome is delivery of responsive and quality developmental social services, through the regulation of social service practitioners. This creates an enabling framework that will broaden the human resource profile of the social development sector, so as to improve the care and protection services provided to vulnerable groups. There is a need for a diverse cadres of social service practitioners including community development practitioner, care givers, and Early Childhood Development practitioners to respond to legislative reforms, the changing needs of communities, and socio-economic conditions in the social welfare services sector. Cabinet approved The Directive on the Determination of other Categories of Designated Employees Required to Disclose Their Financial Interests, which will be implemented with effect from 1 April 2017.The risks to good governance arising from conflict of interest situations do not only face employees in senior management positions. The eDisclosure system is being reconfigured to enable other categories of employees to disclose their financial interests on-line and for the verification process to take place at the departmental level. Cabinet approved South Africa’s Phase 3 Written Follow-up Country Report regarding the implementation of the OECD Convention on Combating Bribery and Foreign Public Officials in International Business Transactions (Anti-Bribery Convention).The report outlines the concerted efforts of government to detect, investigate and prosecute foreign bribery cases. This Convention focuses on the use of domestic law to criminalise bribery of foreign officials. It applies to active and passive bribery, but excludes bribery that is purely domestic and bribery where the direct or indirect recipient of a benefit is not a public official. Phase 1 focussed on identification of legal instruments and mechanisms that countries have adopted to combat foreign bribery. Phase 2 focussed on the application and effectiveness of such instruments and mechanisms. Phase 3 sought to determine the impact of the country’s adoption of the Convention. Phase 4, which commenced in 2016, is focussing on key group-wide cross-cutting issues related to enforcement efforts and changes in the domestic legislation or institutional framework of the Parties. Cabinet approved the proposed measures set out in the Business Case to reposition the Department of Home Affairs. The Department must be positioned within the security system of the state so that it contributes to national security and is able to protect its people, systems and data. This will better enable the department to deliver against its full mandate as a critical enabler of inclusive economic development, national security, effective service delivery and efficient administration. Cabinet approved that the South African Police Service release the national crime statistics report for the trimester of 2016/17. As is the case of the annual crime report, this report will cover the provincial and national incidence of crime. The crime statistics are generated from crime data recorded at station level. The quarterly releases will enable government to monitor key targets, in particular the reduction of reported serious crimes, as set out in the Medium Term Strategic Framework and could also be utilised as early warning to strengthen the crime prevention operations and strategies of Government. Cabinet was briefed on the Minister of Police’s intention to declare an amnesty in terms of the Firearms Control Act, 2000 (Act No 60 of 2000), for a period of six months to maximise the participation of the community, and will commence on 1 April 2017 and end on 30 September 2017.The amnesty will reduce the circulation of illegally possessed firearms which will in turn result in the reduction of contact crimes. The amnesty will focus on the following holders of firearms and/or ammunition in South Africa:a) Persons in possession of illegal firearms and/or ammunition in circulation, including those involved in one or more criminal activities andb) Persons who inherited firearms and/ or ammunition and failed to comply with the provisions of the Firearms Controls Act. Cabinet approved the National Anti-gangsterism Strategy to address gangsterism in all its manifestations by way of an all-government approach. This is aligned to the National Development Plan to ensure that people living in South Africa feel safe at home, schools and work, and enjoy community life free of fear. This also recognises that crime and violence are not just a security issue, but have deep social and economic roots and consequences. Cabinet approved South Africa’s 3rd cycle Universal Periodic Review country report, to be presented for review by the Universal Periodic Review Working Group, at the United Nations (UN) Human Rights Council in May 2017.The report reflects on the progress made by South Africa in realising the human rights and fundamental freedoms contained in the Constitution. The Universal Periodic Review is a unique process which involves a review of human rights records of all 193 UN Member States once every four years. It provides an opportunity for all States to declare what actions they have taken to improve the human rights situations in their countries and to overcome challenges to the enjoyment of human rights. It also includes a sharing of best human rights practices around the globe. Cabinet approved submission of the 1st Quadrennial Country Report on the 2005 Convention on the Protection and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions, to UNESCO. The Convention recognises that cultural goods and services convey identity, values and meaning. Culture has the potential to become one of the strongest contributors to the economy, to social cohesion and to poverty alleviation. Success indicators are the adoption of four complementary strategies: The Mzansi Golden Economy Strategy the Social Cohesion Strategy the National Development Plan and the New Growth Path Strategy and fully established Department of Arts and Culture agencies with Boards. South Africa has also made substantive progress in recognising the importance of indigenous languages in policy and legislation. Bills. Cabinet approved the National Public Health Institutes of South Africa Bill for tabling in Parliament. It provides for the establishment of the National Public Health Institutes of South Africa (NAPHISA), its functions, powers and duties. NAPHISA aims to provide integrated and coordinated disease and injury surveillance, research, monitoring and evaluation of services and intervention directed towards the major public health problems affecting persons in South Africa. This will increase the capacity to monitor communicable, non-communicable diseases and injuries, which will aid in the early detection, prevention, and response to these conditions. This will ultimately contribute to the control of diseases and reduction of morbidity and mortality. NAPHISA will be a national resource that serves public health interest and is intended to provide for a system of health protection that focuses on access, equity, efficiency and quality. Cabinet approved for the National Health Laboratory Service Amendment Bill to be tabled in Parliament. This amends the National Health Laboratory Service Act, 2000 (Act No 37 of 2000).The proposed amendments seek to improve the governance, accountability, and financial sustainability of the National Health Laboratory Service. This will enable the national service to provide diagnostic health laboratory services more cost effectively and with greater efficiency, so as to increase the quality of clinical care provided to patients through timely and judicious clinical management. Cabinet approved that the Older Persons Amendment Bill, 2016 be published for public comment. The Bill amends the Older Persons Act 13 of 2006. The amendments make specific reference to protection and compliance measures which will contribute in provide a safe and protective environment for older persons. The Bills aims to strengthen the monitoring and evaluation measures on services to older persons by putting in place effective enforcement measures for non-compliance which includes the imposition of penalties. This will ensure that older persons have access to quality services such as social, health, community based, and residential care. Cabinet approved the publication of the Fund Raising Amendment Bill, 2016 for public comment. Further, Cabinet approved for the repeal of the existing funds and the consolidation of their assets and liabilities to one Fund. The Bill amends the Fund Raising Act, 1978 which is outdated. The Bill streamlines responses to disasters and allows for the deployment of risk mitigation and developmental strategies through the consolidation of the existing funds including their respective assets and liabilities into one National Social Development and Relief Fund. The fund raising capabilities of the Act will be restored and the fund will not only be able to react when social relief is needed, but will act to mitigate risks and develop communities. Cabinet approved the submission of the National Environmental Management Laws Amendment Bill, 2016 to Parliament. This amends the National Environmental Act, 1998 (Act No. 107 of 1998) as well as a number of Specific Environmental Management Acts. This will strengthen: integrated environmental management one environmental management system compliance and enforcement measures biodiversity and conservation air quality management waste management and integrated coastal management. Cabinet approved for the Draft Regulation of Agricultural Land Holdings Bill, 2017 to be published for public comment. Land Reform is necessary to unlock the potential for a dynamic, growing and employment-creating agricultural sector. Amongst others, the Bill gives effect to the establishment of the Land Commission which will ensure a transparent and more conducive regulatory environment for the generation and utilisation of policy-relevant information on ownership and usage of agricultural land. This will improve the state’s ability to monitor and evaluate its compliance with the constitutional directive to ensure land tenure and related reforms, with the intent of taking measures to redress the results of past racial discrimination. This contributes to the National Development Plan’s vision for rural revitalisation, inclusive economic growth and poverty reduction which also rests on creating more equitable access to land and tenure security for all South Africans. Cabinet approved for the publication of the Property Practitioners Bill, 2016 in the Government Gazette for public comment. The Bill repeals the current Estate Agency Affairs Act, 1976 (Act No. 112 of 1976).The Bill responds to the changing market conditions and dynamics, and strives to create an enabling environment to enhance economic activity within the real estate WEBTOKEN also addresses the need to enhance compliance and enforcement, as well as to ensure transformation in the sector and to regulate the conduct and behaviour of property practitioners. This is aligned to the National Development Plan which calls for the transformation of human settlements and the national space economy through, amongst others, a review of housing policies and legislative frameworks to better realise constitutional rights. This will ensure that the delivery of housing is used to restructure towns and cities and strengthen the livelihood prospects of households. Cabinet approved the Home Loan and Mortgage Disclosure Amendment Bill, 2016 to be published for public comment. The Bill amends the Home Loan and Mortgage Disclosure Act, 2000 (Act No. 63 of 2000).The Bill addresses human settlements challenges identified in the National Development Plan. This includes: dysfunctional settlement patterns across the country challenges facing towns and cities weak spatial planning and governance capabilities. The Bill seeks to provide for housing finance which is in line with section 26 of the Constitution, which stipulates that “everyone has a right to adequate housing”. It further empowers the Office of Disclosure to receive and investigate complaints regarding home loans. This will encourage compliance by financial institutions and will contribute to improved lending patterns and trends of financial institutions regarding home loans. Cabinet approved for the publication of the Traditional Leadership and Governance Framework Amendment Bill, 2016, in the Government Gazette for public comment. This amends the Traditional Leadership and Governance Framework Act, 2003 (Act No. 41 of 2003).The amendments deal with the challenges being experienced with the constitution and reconstitution of traditional leadership structures and, where applicable, the disestablishment of certain structures. The aim is to ensure proper reconstitution of tribal authorities as traditional councils establishment of kingship and queenship councils and disestablishment of community authorities. Cabinet approved for the International Arbitration Bill to be introduced into Parliament. The aim of the Bill is to improve access to justice services and to ensure the realisation of the National Development Plan target of expanding trade and investment and positioning South Africa in the world. The Bill incorporates the Model Law on International Commercial Arbitration, as adopted by the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law. This can be used by business to resolve their international commercial disputes and in terms of which parties can obtain arbitral awards that are legally enforceable. Such a move could contribute to increased economic growth and investment as well as ensure that South Africa is an attractive venue for parties around the world to resolve their commercial disputes. Issues in the Environment. Cabinet joins President Jacob Zuma in calling for restraint amidst tensions between some South Africans and foreign nationals. The violence which accompanied recent community protests in Tshwane is unacceptable and has no place in our democracy. The South African Police Service (SAPS) is prepared to provide a speedy response to incidents of violence and looting. Crime is our common enemy and by working together we can address the issues that concern our communities. There is however no room for acts of violence or intimidation. No grievance can ever justify members of the community taking the law into their own WEBTOKEN acting within the law we can make our communities safer and more secure. Citizens must work with the SAPS and other law enforcement agencies to root out crime in our communities. Government notes the concerns of contracted coal transporters regarding the impact that renewable energy projects may have on the supply of coal to Eskom, which may affect jobs in their industry. Government is open to constructive engagement with the legitimate leaders of the coal trucking industry to address issues. Government must act responsibly in its energy planning to ensure sustainable and affordable energy supply. The system relies on a combination of base load (coal and nuclear) and intermittent supply of electricity (renewables and gas). It is clear from the draft 2016 Integrated Resource Plan that South Africa will continue to deploy coal electricity in the energy mix. Cabinet notes the ruling by the North Gauteng High Court on South Africa's decision to withdraw from the International Criminal Court (ICC). Cabinet is aware that Parliament is considering an appropriate course of action. Cabinet abides by the ruling and has established a technical task team to develop a compliance road map. Commander-in-Chief of the South African National Defence Force President Jacob Zuma officiated at the 5th Armed Forces Day celebrations which was held in Durban in conjunction the 100 years commemoration of the sinking of the SS Mendi which was held in the United Kingdom respectively. Cabinet honours and remembers members of the South African Native Labour Corps who lost their lives during the worst ever maritime accident in the military history of South Africa. These were brave men who had responded to a call by the Imperial power at that time to serve. Following the positive identification of the Fall Army Worm infestation, government led by the Department of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries is continuing with the assessment of spread and damage, as well as awareness actions to provide farmers with accurate technical information and control options as well as to ensure the responsible emergency registration of agricultural chemicals. The department has also initiated a pest action group, which meets regularly to evaluate progress and results with all provincial departments of agriculture, industry members and research organisations. The South African Emergency Plant Pest Response Plan, which deals with new pest detections, is already in motion to fight Fall Army Worm. Government will continue with its engagement with the Southern African Development Community to ensure that early warnings of these biological threats are in place. Cabinet wishes commuters who were injured when two trains collided at the Rosslyn train station north of Pretoria a speedy recovery and conveys its gratitude to emergency services for their quick response in assisting the injured. The work by the board of inquiry in conducting a comprehensive investigation into the cause of the accident and circumstances around it must be prioritised in order to prevent future occurrences. Condolences and Sympathy. Cabinet joins President Jacob Zuma in conveying its condolences to the family of Judge Essa Moosa, who was a shining light of the judiciary who served South Africa with distinction before retiring as a judge of the Western Cape High Court in 2011. He will remembered for his dedication to promoting and protecting human rights, as well as his selfless dedication to the rule of law. Before ascending to the judiciary he served as a human rights lawyer and was at the forefront of challenging apartheid violations such as detention without trial. He was also a founding member of the National Association of Democratic Lawyers. President Jacob Zuma has declared a Special Provincial Official Funeral for the late struggle veteran and a former Robben Island prisoner, Mr Collen Monde Mkunqwana who passed on last week on 21 February 2017. Mr Mkunqwana was a descendent of Mr Makhanda Nxele, a warrior who led the attack against the British in Grahamstown, the municipality is now named after Makana. Details of the funeral will be communicated by the Eastern Cape Provincial Government. Cabinet also conveyed its condolences to the family of Mirriam Tladi, South Africa’s mother of literature and first woman novelist. Mme Tladi who was awarded the order of Ikhamanga broke through literacy bounds despite being barred from Witwatersrand University on discriminating apartheid ground. Cabinet joins President Jacob Zuma in conveying its condolences to the families of the three South African Navy members and three construction workers from the Department of Public Works who died while working in a sewer pit at Naval Base in Durban. The three soldiers were trying to assist workers of the Department of Public Works who were struggling to breathe underground. Cabinet conveys its condolences to the families of the seven people who died in a multi-vehicle accident on the R34 between Vryheid and Dundee when a truck and two light vehicles collided. The country’s thoughts and prayers are with the family of young Richard Thole who allegedly fell down an abandoned mine shaft in Boksburg, on Saturday. Cabinet thanks the rescue team who are making every effort to ensure that Richard is returned to his mother. Cabinet sends it condolences to the family and friends who lost loved ones during the flooding in North West, Rustenburg area. Congratulations. Cabinet congratulates Ambassador Xawier Carrim on his assumption of office as Chair of the General Council of the World Trade Organisation on 28 February 2017. This is the first time a South African has been elected to this position and only the fourth time this office has been held by an African. Cabinet congratulates the Airports Company South Africa for ranking within the top ten companies which manage the most punctual airports in the world, according to OAG Aviation Worldwide. OR Tambo International Airport achieved 8th place in the large airports category, Cape Town International Airport ranked 6th in the medium airports category while the King Shaka International Airport ranked 10th in the small airports category. Cabinet congratulates Mamelodi Sundowns for winning the Confederation of African Football (CAF) Super Cup. Sundowns proved that they are the best team in the Continent after beating TP Mazembe 1-0. We are hopeful this win will go a long way towards inspiring other teams to follow in the footsteps of Mamelodi Sundowns. AppointmentsAll appointments are subject to the verification of qualifications and the relevant clearance. Ms. Zanele Monnakgotla as a Non-Executive Member to the South African Bureau of Standards Board. Non-Executive Directors to the South African Special Risk Insurance Association State Owned Company (SOC) Limited:a) Ms Tando Mbatsha (re-appointment) andb) Ms Tshwarelo Moutlane (re-appointment). Non-Executive Directors to the Land and Agricultural Development Bank Board:a) Ms Dumo Motau (re-appointment)b) Ms Thembekile Thelma Ngcobo (re-appointment) andc) Ms Gugu Mtetwa. Mr. TS Mokoena as the Director-General of the Department of Mineral Resources. Enquiries:Donald LiphokoCell: 082 901 0766
