This Cabinet statement is now available in all official languages.    1. Key Cabinet decisions1.1. Cabinet approved the plans to set up the Operation Phakisa Mining Lab, which will identify a set of concrete problems that are limiting the growth and developmental impact of the sector. The Mining Lab will also collaboratively develop plans to overcome these challenges. A four-week Mining Lab is scheduled for October 2015.1.2. Cabinet approved the publishing for public comments of the draft Biodiversity Economy Strategy. The strategy covers the period of 14 years ending 2030. The strategy seeks to increase biodiversity’s contribution to the Gross Domestic Product whilst conserving the country’s ecosystem.It will among other things, focus on enhancing growth in both wildlife and ecotourism sectors.1.3. Cabinet approved the publishing for public comments of the draft framework and approach for the formulation of South Africa’s Intended Nationally Determined Contribution for consultation with stakeholders ahead of its submission to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC).The framework once fully consulted will form of the legal agreement under the UNFCCC, which will be adopted in Paris, France in December 2015.2. BillsCabinet approved the publishing of the following Bills for public comments:2.1. Border Management Agency  (BMA) Bill, 2015, which seeks to establish the BMA that will balance secure cross-border travel, trade facilitation and national security imperatives, within the context of South Africa’s regional, African and international obligations.This single authority for border law enforcement provides the potential for more cost- effective services as well as enhanced security and management of the border environment.2.2. Refugees Amendment Bill, 2015, which seeks to create a more efficient and effective functioning application process for asylum seekers.Cabinet further approved the submission of the following Bills to Parliament:2.3. Local Government: Municipal Electoral Amendment Bill, 2015, which amends the Local Government: Municipal Electoral Act, 2000 (Act 27 of 2000).The amendments address issues with a view to ensuring smooth preparation and execution of the 2016 local government elections.2.4. Unemployment Insurance Amendment Bill, 2014. This is the second amendment to the Unemployment Insurance Act, 2001 (Act 63 of 2001).Once the Bill is passed, it will amongst others extend the period of payments of benefits to the contributor from eight to 12 months and extend the period in which a contributor can lodge a claim from six months to 12 months.3. Upcoming events3.1. Cabinet approved the 2015 Women’s Month theme: “Women, United in Moving South Africa Forward” and calendar of activities for Women’s Month, which leads to a year-long programme.The Women’s Day event on 9 August 2015 will take place at Sasolburg, Free State, which will also be marked by President Jacob Zuma’s release of the first Status of Women Report.2015 also marks the 59th anniversary of the Women’s March to the Union Buildings against pass laws, kick-starting the build-up to the 60th anniversary in 2016.3.2. The Minister of Science and Technology, Ms Naledi Pandor, will launch National Science Week (NSW) taking place from 1 to 8 August  2015 at North-West University's  (NWU) Mafikeng Campus on 1 August. She will be accompanied by the North West MEC for Education, Ms Maphefo Matsemela, and the NWU’s Vice Chancellor, Prof Dan Kgwadi. The event will be attended by thousands of learners, university students, scientists and members of the community.The theme for NSW 2015 is “International Year of Light and Light-based Technologies”. Light and its significance in improving lives will be showcased in different forms such as the application of laser in health, cataract surgery, industry manufacturing, car welding and security beams for deterring burglary.The Department of Science and Technology has, through the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR), invested in photonics – the science of light technology of generating controlling and detecting light waves and particles of light. This has led among other things, to the world’s first breakthrough in digital-laser technology. The breakthrough at the CSIR represents a new way of thinking about laser technology and could be a platform on which future technologies are built.4. AppointmentsAll appointments are subject to the verification of qualifications and the relevant clearance.4.1. Mr Stavros Nicolaou as the alternate National Economic Development and Labour Council member to the Special Economic Zones Advisory Board.4.2. Land Bank:a) Mr Bafana Patrick Mathidi –  (re-appointment as Non-Executive Director);b) Adv. Sandra Julie Hester Coetzee  – (Non-Executive Director);c) Ms Mathane Eveline Makgatho –  (Non-Executive Director); andd) Mr Bennie van Rooy  – (Chief Financial Officer as Executive Director).4.3. Council of the National Home Builders Registration Council:a) Mr Abbey Chikane (Chairperson);b) Ms Julieka Bayat;c) Ms Xoliswa Eunice Daku;d) Mr Themba Thomas Cyril Dlamini;e) Ms Hlaleleni Kathleen Dlepu;f) Ambassador Segogwane Samuel Kotane;g) Mr Phetola Nailana Solomon Makgathe;h) Ms Mankwana Christinah Mohale;i) Ms Busisiwe Nwabisa Nzo;j) Mr Alvin Phumudzo Rapea;k) Mr Goolam Hoosen Manack (National Treasury representative);l) Mr Obed Lucas Molotsi  (Department of Public Works representative); andm) Mr Lulama Andisa Potwana (Department of Trade and Industry representative).4.4. Dr Muzamani Charles Nwaila as Director-General (DG) for the Department of Traditional Affairs – (Extension of the contract for three years.)4.5. Dr Bongani Douglas Ngqulunga as Deputy DG: Private Office of the President in The Presidency.Enquiries:Ms Phumla Williams (Acting Cabinet Spokesperson)Contact: 083 501 0139 
