Cabinet met on Wednesday, 30 October 2019 at Tuynhuys in Cape TownA. Issues In The Environment1. South Africa Investment Conference (SAIC)1.1. Cabinet is looking forward with positive anticipation to the Second SAIC 2019 to be held next week from the 5th to 7th November 2019 at the Sandton Convention Centre in Gauteng under the theme: “Accelerating Economic Growth by Building Partnerships”.1.2. The SAIC 2019 will build on the first SAIC held in October 2018, which attracted R300 billion in investment commitments. These included international e-commerce giant Amazon establishing a cloud-computing hub in South Africa; global mining company Vedanta Resources investing in a local smelter; Rwanda-based technology company, Mara Corporation, to make high-tech smartphones and pharmaceutical company Aspen Pharmacare investing in the manufacture of sterile anesthetics.1.3. We join all South Africans in welcoming over 1500 delegates representing local and international businesses men and women expected to attend the Investment Conference.1.4. On the 7th November, the conference will proceed at the University of Johannesburg Soweto Campus, with a focus on entrepreneurship, innovation and growing small and medium businesses.2. Africa Investment Forum (AIF)2.1. The African Development Bank Group will convene the Africa Investment Forum from the 11th to 13th November 2019 in Johannesburg. This is another investment opportunity for South Africa to tap into the capital that seeks to drive the advancement of Africa’s infrastructure.2.2. The forum brings together pension funds, sovereign wealth funds, private investors, private equity firms and heads of government. It will focus on developing and executing deals to unlock Africa’s multibillion-dollar investment opportunities.2.3. In pursuit of our stated goal of rolling out public and private infrastructural programme, the government has set aside R100 billion over 10 years for a National Infrastructure Fund, and is looking forward to working with private investors and international financial institutions to leverage finance for our country’s infrastructure development.2. Medium Term Budget Policy Statement (MTBPS)2.1. Cabinet has welcomed the 2019 MTBPS tabled by Finance Minister Tito Mboweni presented against the backdrop of a tough local and global economy, the 2019 MTBPS proposes measures that will arrest the public expenditure and the running debt to GDP.2.2. Cabinet also noted that the results of the Quarterly Labour Force Survey for the third quarter of 2019 released by Statistics South Africa indicated that the official unemployment rate increased by 0,1 of a percentage point to 29,1% compared to the second quarter of 2019.2.3. Cabinet is optimistic that if all South Africans join government in implementing the commitments detailed in the 2019 MTBPS, we can help grow South Africa together, increase our economic growth and the number of much-needed jobs in the country.3. Eskom4.1. Cabinet has welcomed the paper titled “Roadmap for Eskom in a Reformed Electricity Supply Industry”, which was released by Public Enterprises Minister Pravin Gordhan on Tuesday, 29 October 2019.4.2. This followed the announcement made by President Ramaphosa in his February 2019 State of the Nation Address that to improve operational efficiency, Eskom would be unbundled and separated into three subsidiaries namely transmission, generation and distribution.4.3. Cabinet endorses the proposals in Eskom’s business model, which is the latest blueprint to put Eskom onto a growth trajectory. The roadmap envisions cost-effective electricity supply, energy security and diverse sources of energy in line with the Integrated Resource Plan, which was gazetted earlier this month and detailed the country's energy mix over the next 10 years.4.4. We call on all stakeholders in the energy sector to fully support the implementation of this plan.5. Rugby World Cup (RWC) Final5.1. Cabinet proudly congratulates the national rugby team, the Springboks, on reaching the finals of the 2019 RWC.  Cabinet calls on all South Africans and our supporters from across the globe to rally behind the “Boks” and demonstrate their support for their countrymen by participating in Green Fridays and sharing messages of support on social-media platforms using the hashtag #StrongerTogether, #Bokke, #Rugbyworldcup.5.2. President Ramaphosa will attend the final match in Japan to give concrete support to our national team.5.3. Cabinet also welcomes the SABC’s decision to broadcast live the final match between South Africa and England on Saturday, the 2nd November, from 11h00. 6. Water conservation6.1. Cabinet encourages all people in South Africa to continue to save and conserve water. This follows the recent reported drop in the country’s dam levels. South Africa is amongst 30 of the most dry countries in the world. The prolonged lower-than-normal rainfall in some parts of the country, coupled with recent heatwave temperatures, has exacerbated the situation.6.2. While the Department of Water and Sanitation has implemented contingency plans, Cabinet urges all of us to work together to ensure the sustainable use of this critical and scarce resource. Water-saving tips include checking for leaks, using grey water to water gardens before 06:00 or after 18:00 and planting drought-resistant shrubs. We must all play our part in conserving water.7. Strategic partnerships with China7.1. Deputy President David Mabuza is on a working visit in the People’s Republic of China, where he will co-chair the 7th Session of the South Africa-China Binational Commission (BNC) taking place until 3 November 2019.  The South Africa-China BNC was established in 2002 to serve as a strategic platform to address issues of common interest such as trade promotions and economic exchanges7.2. A total of about 26 South African companies are investing in China, with a capital expenditure of R88 billion between January 2003 and August 2019. On the other hand, a total of 88 Chinese companies are investing in South Africa, with a capital expenditure of R116 billion over the same period.7.3. Cabinet welcomes the signing of the strategic cooperation agreement between South African Tourism and Chinese company, Tencent, which owns the communication platform WeChat. The two-year partnership gives South Africa direct access to millions of potential Chinese travellers for both business and leisure, to market the country as a destination of choice.7.4. South Africa aims to double its international tourist arrivals from 10, 4 million to 21 million by 2030.7.5. Cabinet also welcomes the Department of Basic Education’s empowerment initiative for school managers, in partnership with the government of China, which saw 25 principals sharing and engaging on best practice in the schooling environment with their Chinese counterparts in Shanghai, China.8. Crime prevention8.1. Cabinet recognises the work of Operation O Kae Molao, which is led by the South African Police Service (SAPS) and continues to make remarkable progress in the fight against crime in Gauteng.8.2. Hundreds of suspects across the province have been arrested for various crimes and these included 717 wanted suspects, 90 of whom were fugitives wanted for cases relating to gender-based violence (GBV).8.3. Cabinet calls on all South Africans to continue their support and involvement in the fight against crime by reporting criminal activities to law-enforcement agencies. Citizens can also use the new SAPS crime-fighting app, MySAPS, to provide anonymous tip-offs, locate their nearest police station or send emergency alerts and messages. Cabinet is committed to ensuring that local communities live in safe and secure environments.9. GBV and Femicide9.1. Cabinet welcomes the recent 20 life sentences and 758 years imprisonment sanctions handed down to the serial rapist, Bongani Lucky Masuku, as well as the life sentence handed to convicted rapist Nicholas Ninow. This sends a strong message to perpetrators that our criminal justice system will not tolerate crimes against women and children.9.2. Government remains committed to providing care for victims and encourages victims of GBV to make use of the services offered by the GBV Command Centre. The centre operates 24 hours, 365 days a year. Victims can call 0800 428 428 or send a please call me on *120*7867# or log onto the website www.gbv.org.za. President Ramaphosa will today update Parliament and the nation on efforts to end GBV and Femicide when he answers questions in the National Assembly.B. Cabinet decisions1. National Drug Master Plan (NDMP) 2019-20241.1. Cabinet approved the NDMP 2019-2024 and its implementation plan, which outlines strategies to combat the abuse of drugs and substances in South Africa. This NDMP 2019-2024 follows an evaluation of the NDMP 2013-2017. 1.2. The plan proposes seven strategic goals to combat the abuse of drugs within our communities. It also proposes dealing with the reduction of the demand for drugs, tighter control of drugs intended for therapeutic use, as well as governance, leadership and accountability of the execution of the NDMP.2. National Child Care and Protection Policy (NCCP)2.1. Cabinet approved the NCCP, which gives effect to the Children Act, 2005 (Act 38 of 2005). Section 28 of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa of 1996 recognises the right of all children to social services and protection from violence, abuse, neglect and exploitation.2.2. The approved NCCP strengthens the coordination of the childcare and protection system, and ensures maximum use of current resources for improved services which promote positive development of children. The policy further responds to the North Gauteng High Court judgement which instructed the Minister of Social Development to make amendments that strengthen the foster care system.3. Lesotho Special Permits (LSP)3.1. Cabinet approved the extension of the LSP by another four years. The current dispensation expires on 31 December 2019. The extension will allow the Department of Home Affairs (DHA) to conclude its work in finding ways to address issues of migration, particularly for citizens from the Southern African Development Community region.3.2. The extension is only applicable to existing holders of the LSP. The DHA will provide more details on the process to be followed.C. Upcoming Events1. Opening of High Court1.1. President Ramaphosa will officially open the Mpumalanga High Court in Mbombela, on Friday, 8 November 2019. The President will be joined by the Justice and Correctional Services Minister Ronald Lamola and Public Works and Infrastructure Minister Patricia de Lille to mark an important milestone in the programme that aims to provide access to justice to all South Africans.  This is the last phase of the programme that ensures that a High Court is established in each of the nine provinces in South Africa.1.2. The people of Mpumalanga will now have their own High Court and will no longer have to commute at high cost to Pretoria to seek legal redress.D. Messages1. Cabinet extended its congratulations to:1.1. 12-year-old Olwami Shangase from KwaZulu-Natal, whose book titled Rejected Treasure aims to teach everyone, especially children, about the power of forgiving and loving.1.2. 11-year-old Amahle Zenzile from Cape Town, who has been invited to represent South Africa at the African Youth Chess Tournament to be held in Namibia in December.1.3. South African producer and composer, Mr Lebohang Morake, who ensured that the Drakensberg Boys Choir flew our flag high when they performed in a special Lion King tribute in London.1.4. President Mokgweetsi Masisi and the people of Botswana on another peaceful presidential election, which further strengthens Botswana’s democracy. South Africa is sending a delegation to be part of the Inauguration of the Botswana President tomorrow, 1 November 2019. We look forward to continue with our social, economic, political and diplomatic relations with Botswana.E. AppointmentsAll appointments are subject to the verification of qualifications and the relevant clearance.1. The ZA Domain Name Authority Board:1.1. Ms. Palesa Legoze (Chairperson)1.2. Ms. Veronica Motloutsi1.3. Ms. Sizo Mzizi1.4. Prof Kasturi Moodaliyar1.5. Ms. Malekgoloane Malapane1.6. Prof Daniel Mashao1.7. Ms. Anriette Esterhuysen1.8. Mr. Rendani Mbuvha, and1.9. Mr. Nicholas Msibi (re-appointment)2. Ms. Mmakgomo Anna Tshatsinde, Deputy Director-General (DDG): Sector Monitoring Services, Department of Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation (DPME).3. Mr Blake Keith Mosley-Lefatola, DDG: Public Sector Monitoring and Capacity Development, DPME.4. Mr Luambo Thomas Sigama, DDG: Civic Services, DHA.Enquiries:Phumla WilliamsCell: 083 501 0139
