A.    ISSUES IN THE ENVIRONMENT1.    Adjusted Alert Level 4 of the national lockdown1.1.    Cabinet reaffirmed the move to Adjusted Alert Level 4 as announced by His Excellency President Cyril Ramaphosa on Sunday, 27 June 2021 as a necessary step in the fight against the third wave of the COVID-19 pandemic in South Africa.1.2.    The tightening of the restrictions will strengthen our ability to limit the surge in infections thereby limiting the burden on the health care system that is already overwhelmed.1.3.    The additional restrictions will be reviewed after 14 days and took care to minimise the impact in economic activity as part of the continued balancing of the need to save both lives and livelihoods.1.4.    Cabinet re-emphasized that the Delta variant is more transmissible than previous variants, and therefore requires vigilance in our day- to-day interactions because many people who are infected with COVID-19 do not show any symptoms. 1.5.    The Consolidated Occupational Health Safety Directions by the Minister of Employment and Labour provides guidelines which balance the need to keep businesses running while also ensuring the health and safety of everyone in the workplace.1.6.    During this dangerous period, it is advisable and critical to save lives by avoiding public places as far as possible, abiding by the Covid-19 Disaster Management Regulations and adhering to non- pharmaceutical health protocols of wearing masks when in public, washing our hands frequently with soap and water or using a 70% alcohol-based hand sanitiser, maintaining a social distance of at least 1,5 metres at all times.2.    COVID-19 vaccine roll-out2.1.    South Africa continues to intensify the COVID-19 Vaccination Roll-out Programme to protect citizens from the devastating effects of the virus. As of the 30 June 2021, over 3 million (3, 026, 636) people have been vaccinated and these include health care workers, persons aged 60 and older, and educators. This 238 315 educators that have been vaccinated.2.2.    Cabinet commended the departments of Health and Basic Education for responding accordingly to the needs of educators and other personnel within the public and private education sectors by undertaking a comprehensive vaccination programme.2.3.    The vaccination of security personnel will commence on Monday, 5 July 2021 with members of the SAPS and Thursday, 8 July 2021 with members of the South African National Defence Force.2.4.    The registration for vaccination on the EVDS has been opened for registration for persons aged 50 years and older, and their vaccination is scheduled to commence on Thursday, 15 July 2021. People in this age group are encouraged to register using the https://vaccine.enroll.health.gov.za or WhatsApp: 0600 123456.2.5.    The dates for vaccination of employees in the frontline of productive economic sectors such as mines, retail workers and others will be announced by the IMC on Vaccines that is chaired by the Deputy President.3.    Youth Day3.1.    Cabinet thanked all South Africans for joining in the country’s Youth Day celebrations on Wednesday, 16 June 2021 under the theme: “The Year of Charlotte Mannya Maxeke: Growing youth employment for an inclusive and transformed society.”3.2.    President Ramaphosa unveiled the online learning and jobs opportunities platforms, SA Youth and mPowa, which seek to create funding opportunities and jobs for young people by connecting them with potential employers and funders. Youth can create a profile, view opportunities for learning and earning, and receive support through multiple channels on the platforms.3.3.    Visit http://SAYouth.mobi or dial the toll-free: 0800 72 72 72 to access a range of opportunities and support through the Presidential Youth Employment Intervention.B.    CABINET DECISIONS1.    Report on Local Government1.1.    Cabinet discussed the state of local government informed by the reports from the Department of Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs (CoGTA), National Treasury and Auditor-General South Africa.1.2.    Cabinet noted the dire state of some municipalities and that in some instances, national government will have to intervene decisively to improve service delivery and the capacity of specific municipalities in line with the provisions of Section 139(7) of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa of 1996.1.3.    In addition, national government led by CoGTA, National Treasury and service-delivery departments will strengthen their support to municipalities in line with the District-based Development Model (DDM) and their responsibilities as provided for in Section 154 of the Constitution.2.    Southern African Development Community (SADC) intervention in Mozambique2.1.    Cabinet welcomed the decisions of  the Extraordinary Summit of the Heads of State and Government of the SADC held in Maputo, Mozambique on Wednesday, 23 June 2021.2.2.    The summit approved the participation of the member countries in the intervention to stabilise the situation in Mozambique. As part of the SADC, South Africa will also participate in these initiatives meant to restore stability in the region.3.    Hosting of the 21st International Conference on AIDS and Sexually Transmitted Infections (STIs) in Africa (ICASA)3.1.    Cabinet approved for South Africa to host the 21st ICASA, which will be held in Durban from 6 to 11 December 2021.3.2.    The hosting of the ICASA will give South Africa an opportunity to showcase its commitment to respond to the United Nations’ 90-90-90 treatment targets to help end the AIDS epidemic. South Africa has made remarkable progress in the fight against HIV and AIDS, but more still needs to be done to reduce the number of new infections.3.3.    The conference will further provide a platform for discussions and learning opportunities regarding HIV and STIs prevention strategies in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic.4.    Condolences to the people of Zambia4.1.    Cabinet extended its condolences to the family and Zambian people on the passing on of the founding President of the Republic of Zambia, Dr Kenneth “KK” Kaunda (97), on Thursday, 17 June 2021. Dr Kaunda was one of the leading advocates of Pan-Africanism, and a pioneering champion of a decolonised, united and prosperous Africa.4.2.    In his honour, President Ramaphosa declared 10 days of mourning from Friday, 18 June 2021 until the evening on Sunday, 27 June 2021, which involved flying flags at half-mast at all flag stations.4.3.    Throughout his life, Dr Kaunda worked tirelessly for economic, social and political progress in Africa, and was a giant of the Struggle for an Africa free from colonial and apartheid rule. He championed African humanism, and will be fondly remembered for his outstanding leadership in the formation of the Non-Aligned Movement and the then Organisation of African Unity (now called African Union).4.4.    Cabinet endorsed a programme led by the Department of Sport, Arts and Culture to pay tribute to the life and contribution of Dr Kaunda to the liberation of his own country and the continent, particularly the Southern African region. President Ramaphosa will attend the funeral to be held in Lusaka on Friday, 2 July 2021.C.    BILLS1.    Deeds Registration Amendment Bill1.1.    Cabinet approved the publication of the Deeds Registries Amendment Bill for public comment. The Bill amends the Deeds Registries Act, 1937 (Act 47 of 1937), which has become outdated in its processes.1.2.    Apart from overhauling the operational procedures of Deeds Registries Office, the Bill also introduces the electronic system of processing submissions, which will modernise the process of serving the conveyancers and the public in general. It also proposes the appointment of the Registrar of Deeds, Deputy Registrar of Deeds and Assistant Registrar of Deeds.2.    Draft South African Broadcasting Corporation (SABC) Bill of 20202.1.    Cabinet approved the publication of the SABC Bill of 2020 for public comment and consultation. Once passed into law, the Bill will result in the repeal of the current Broadcasting Act, 1999 (Act 4 of 1999). It seeks to strengthen the efficiency of the operations of the public broadcaster.2.2.    The Bill proposes, amongst other changes, the streamlining of the Board of the SABC, which will strengthen its responsibilities and accountability. It also proposes reforms in the SABC’s funding model and the TV licensing system.D.    UPCOMING EVENTS1.    Nelson Mandela Month1.1.    Every year on 18 July, South Africans together with the global community honour our former President and international icon – Dr Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela – through the celebration of Nelson Mandela International Day. 1.2.    In these trying times, we depend on our spirit of national solidarity and selflessness as epitomised by Madiba to see one another through. In the spirit of Madiba, Cabinet encouraged South Africans to rise to the challenge and support those in our communities shattered by the effects of COVID-19. We can embrace Madiba’s values and honour his legacy through humanitarian acts and initiatives supporting those hard-pressed by the impact of the virus.2.    Tax Season2.1.    The 2021 tax filing season will open on Thursday, 1 July 2021 until Tuesday, 23 November 2021. Taxpayers are encouraged to file their tax returns on eFiling (www.sars.gov.za) or the South African Revenue Service Mobi-App.2.2.    This year a significant number of individual taxpayers will again be auto- assessed to simplify the process. The timely and accurate submission of tax returns ensures taxpayers remain compliant and helps government to deliver services to South Africans who need them most.E.    MESSAGES1.    CongratulationsCabinet extended its congratulations and well-wishes to:Mr Nicholas Dlamini, the first black South African to race in the Tour de France.Kaizer Chiefs FC for securing a place in the prestigious CAF Champions League Finals to be held in Morocco on Saturday, 17 July 2021, and Coach Pitso for leading Ahl Aly FC of Egypt to the same CAF Champions Finals.Mr Lesetja Kganyago, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank (SARB), who was awarded the Central Bank Governor of the Year in the 2021 edition of the African Banker Awards. Under his leadership, the SARB acted decisively against the impact of COVID-19 on the economy.Dr Ngwako Stephen Sebopetsa, the Principal of Rathaga Primary School in Rakwadu 1 Circuit, Mopani East District, Limpopo, for receiving the Global Principals’ Award for excellent leadership acumen, significant work and contribution in the field of education.SARB, on its centenary celebration that was marked on Wednesday, 30 June 2021. The bank opened its doors on 30 June 1921 and is the oldest central bank in Africa. The SARB holds the important constitutional mandate to maintain price stability in the interest of  a balanced and sustainable economic growth. The bank has released a new commemorative R5 coin in honour of its 100 years in existence.2.    CondolencesCabinet expressed condolences to the family and friends of:Dr Jabu Mabuza (63), an accomplished South African entrepreneur and business leader who served as the Chief Executive Officer (CEO) of Tsogo Sun Holdings, Chairperson of the Eskom Board and also as the President of Business Unity South Africa.Prof Mzilikazi Khumalo (89) and his wife Mama Rose Khumalo (88). Prof Khumalo was a colossal figure in South Africa’s academic, cultural and public landscape. He was also known for being a prominent folk-song arranger‚ choral composer and choir director. He helped put together the first Zulu opera, Princess Magogo kaDinuzulu. Most notably, Prof Khumalo was part of the committee that amalgamated the Nkosi Sikelel’ iAfrika prayer with the apartheid-era anthem, Die Stem, to form the post- apartheid South African National Anthem. F.    APPOINTMENTAll appointments are subject to the verification of qualifications and the relevant clearance.1.    Ms Tirhane Alinah Fosi as CEO of Government Printing Works, for five years.Enquiries:Ms Phumla Williams – Cabinet SpokespersonMobile: 083 501 0139
