1. The passing of Minister Ohm Collins Chabane. Cabinet is saddened by the untimely passing of Minister Chabane and his protectors, Sergeants Lesiba Samuel Sekele and Mareme Lawrence Lentsoane, who died in a tragic car crash on Sunday, 15 March 2015. Government and the people of South Africa will solely miss the contribution from this servant of the people who remained committed to building a better South Africa until WEBTOKEN a member of the Executive, the late Public Service and Administration Minister will be afforded an Official Funeral Category The funeral service will take place on Saturday, 21 March 2015 at Xikundu village in Malamulele, Limpopo. Cabinet conveys its sincerest condolences to the families and friends of the late Minister and his two protectors. Implementation of key government programmes. President Jacob Zuma will lead the 50th anniversary celebrations of South Africa’s nuclear research reactor SAFARI-1 operated by the National Energy Regulator of South Africa (NERSA) at Pelindaba near Pretoria. Since its commissioning on 18 March 1965, the reactor, which is a major producer of medical and industrial isotopes for both domestic and international consumption, received many accolades and international accreditation. This reactor has also played a critical role in nuclear research, development and education and has placed South Africa in the forefront of scientific advances. Cabinet calls on South Africans to nominate suitable individuals to serve on the National Planning Commission before the closing date of 10 April 2015. The focus of the new commission will be on advising government on how best to implement the National Development Plan. In addition it will also assist in developing detailed plans in selected sectors that require focussed attention to drive economic growth, radical economic transformation and sustainable development. More information on the nomination process is available on: www. thepresidency. gov. za. Key Cabinet decisions. Cabinet approved the submission to Parliament the Amendments to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court for ratification. The amendments include the definition of crimes of aggression and additional acts constituting the war crimes in the Rome Statute adopted by the Assembly of State Parties (in Kampala, Uganda on 11 June 2010).Ratification of these amendments to the Rome Statute by South Africa demonstrates government’s commitment to fight serious crimes against humanity and crime of aggression when committed in or outside our country. Cabinet’s position on current issues. Cabinet notes the responses to the latest round of proposed demarcations and acknowledges that robust debate is an integral part of our democracy. Since there are some municipalities that are struggling to deliver services and remain unsustainable due to insufficient revenue and inadequate governance, municipal boundaries are constantly reviewed. The proposed changes are first scrutinised by the Municipal Demarcation Board (MDB), which is charged with determining municipal boundaries in accordance with the Local Government: Municipal Demarcation Act, 1998 (Act 27 of 1998) and the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa of 1996. As an independent body, the MDB processes are transparent and consultative. Cabinet, encourages communities to actively participate in these processes. Cabinet condemns the usage of violent protest marches as a means of resolving demarcation disputes. The work of the MDB is an integral part of government’s Back to Basics approach to ensure better delivery of services to communities. Cabinet congratulates the Basotho people for a smooth transfer of power and has urged them to work together for lasting peace and economic development. Cabinet also congratulated the new Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Lesotho, Right Honourable Pakalitha Mosisili on his election and successful inauguration that took place on Tuesday, 17 March 2015, which was attended by His Excellency President Jacob Zuma and Deputy President Cyril Ramaphosa. Cabinet congratulated the Deputy President on the role he played leading to the successful elections in the Kingdom of Lesotho. It further appreciated the role played by the Southern African Development Community in facilitating a roadmap for peace and elections of the new government. Cabinet reiterated South Africa’s commitment to continue working with the Kingdom of Lesotho to further enhance the existing relations by focusing on strengthening economic and social cooperation that will lead to the improvement of people’s lives. Upcoming events. Deputy President Ramaphosa will attend the Republic of Namibia’s 25th Independence Anniversary, including the Inauguration of President Hage Geingob in Windhoek on 21 March 2015. Cabinet commends Namibia on its Silver Jubilee celebrations and President Geingob on becoming the country’s third Head of State. President Zuma will host Zimbabwe’s President Robert Mugabe from 8 to 9 April 2015 in Pretoria. The visit will culminate into the South Africa-Zimbabwe Business Forum scheduled for 9 April 2015, which aims to increase bilateral trade and investment. President Zuma will on 19 March 2015 launch 95 locomotives in Pretoria that have been built as part of Transnet’s R300 billion capital investment programme to revitalise the country’s freight infrastructure. Over the duration of the investment programme a number of new jobs will be created and local businesses stand to benefit from localisation, skills development and technology transfer. The new trains will address the country’s rail system backlog and will help improve the productivity and efficiency of our rail network. The launch also signals the transformation of Transnet Engineering into a fully-fledged original equipment manufacturer as 85 of the trains were produced at its facility at Koedoespoort, near Pretoria. President Zuma will open the Black Industrialists Indaba taking place from 25 to 26 March 2015 at Gallagher Convention Centre, Midrand, as part of government’s commitment to develop black industrialists in the country. The Indaba will foster dialogue between the public and private sector to advance black industrialists, and to radically transform and restructure the economy to achieve inclusive growth. President Zuma will address the National Members Assembly (NMA) of the South African Local Government Association, which will take place at Gallagher Convention Centre, Midrand from 24 to 26 March 2015. The NMA will reflect on the state of local government after 15 years and discuss strategies to deal effectively with service delivery, capacity building, corruption and issues around the demarcation of municipalities. The Assembly will be held under the theme: “15 Years of Democratic Local Government – Consolidating and Deepening Vibrant, Developmental and People Centered Local Democracy”. South Africans will celebrate the national Human Rights Day event on 21 March 2015 in Uitenhage, Eastern Cape under the theme: “Celebrating the Freedom Charter, Enjoying Equal Human Rights for All”. These events will provide a platform for all South Africans to commemorate the sacrifices that accompanied the struggle for democracy and our commitment to advance human rights as enshrined in the Constitution. Cabinet calls on all South Africans to celebrate this important day by fostering greater social cohesion and nation-building. As part of Human Rights Month, community dialogues will take place across all provinces to promote interaction among communities of different backgrounds. This will culminate in the National Social Cohesion Report-back and Monitoring Summit to be held on 30 March 2015 in Port Elizabeth. The Department of Social Development will host the National Social Work Indaba from 24 to 26 March 2015 at the International Convention Centre in Durban under the theme: “Revitalising social work practice in South Africa”.The Indaba will develop proposals and interventions to address matters that impact on the social work practice and align the development mandate of the profession to support government’s radical socio-economic transformation. To accomplish this, the department has rolled out a scholarship programme to fund students studying social work at universities. The Department of Social Development will also hold the 2nd Anti-Fraud and Corruption Conference from 30 to 31 March 2015 at St George’s Hotel, Centurion under the theme: “Ensuring human rights for all through a fraud free social grants system”. The conference will evaluate the current measures to root out corruption within the social grant system. Cabinet welcomes the hosting of the inaugural basketball Four Nations Challenge taking place at Wembley Stadium, Johannesburg from 19 to 22 March 2015. This brings the senior men’s teams of South Africa, Nigeria, Mozambique and Kenya together in what is envisaged to become an annual event. Cabinet congratulates our cricket team, which has advanced to the semis with a nine-wicket win over Sri Lanka in their World Cup match. We wish the team and the coach well as they proceed with the rest of the tournament. AppointmentsAll appointments are subject to the verification of qualifications and the relevant clearance. Water Tribunal:a. Adv Tintswalo Annah Nana Makhubele (Chairperson)b. Ms Lindelwa Mbanjwa (Deputy Chairperson)c. Mr Pumezo Malik Mpumelelo Jonasd. Ms Maleho Margaret Nkomoe. ProfTumai Murombo, andf. Mr Ferdinand Zondagh. Social Housing Regulatory Authoritya. Ahmed Essop Vawda (Chairperson and reappointment)b. Shadrack Kabelo Gandac. Itumeleng William Kotsoaned. Kelikile Elva Kwinanae. Maphuti Justine Lamola (reappointment)f. Nontutuzelo Nomtandazo Mbiza (reappointment)g. Mandla Mdludluh. Rose Sessie Molokoanei. Manye Richard Morokaj. Zolile Thando Ngcakanik. Zikiswa Zandile Ntlangula, andl. Phakamile Worrel Weekes Ximiya. National Electronic Media Institute of South Africa (NEMISA)Reappointment of Non-Executive Directors to the Board of NEMISA:a. Mr Thami ka Plaatjieb. Dr Molatelo Maloka. South African Revenue Service Advisory Committeea. Judge Frank Kroon (Chairperson)b. Adv Selby Mfanelo Mbenenge (Deputy Chairperson)c. Adv Roedolf Mastenbroekd. Mr Lazarus Docter Mokoena, ande. Ms Mmakgolo Meta Maponya. Government Sector Education and Training WEBTOKEN Gugu Dlamini as the Chief Executive Officer (CEO). National Electronic Media Institute of South Africa (NEMISA)Dr Ndivhoniswani Aaron Tshidzumba as the CEO of NEMISState Information Technology Agency (SITA)Dr Setumo Mohapi as the CEO of SITDepartment of Science and TechnologyMs Mohlago Flora Mokgohloa as the Deputy Director-General: Institutional Planning and Support. National Forum on Legal Profssion:a) Mr Max Boqwanab) Mr Krish Govenderc) Mr Jan Mareed) Ms Martha Mbhelee) Ms Janine Myburghf) Mr Richard Scottg) Mr Lutendo Sigogoh) Mr Jan Stemmetti) Adv Willem van der Linde SCj) Adv Ismail Jamie SCk) Adv Greg Harpur SCl) Adv Thami Ncongwane SCm) Adv Dali Mpofu SCn) ProfManagay Reddio) Adv M A Hawyesp) Adv Samuel Mgibaq) Adv D Ntsebeza SCr) Adv Kgomotso Ditsebe Morokas) Ms Namhla Thina Siwendut) Adv Brian Nair, andu) Mr Uys Mathebula. Enquiries:Phumla Williams (Acting Cabinet Spokesperson)Cell: 083 501 0139
