Cabinet met at the Sefako M Makgatho Presidential Guesthouse in Pretoria on Tuesday, 1 August Cabinet Decisions South Africa commemorates Women’s Month in August, as a tribute to more than 20 000 women who marched to the Union Buildings on 9 August 1956 in protest against the extension of pass laws to women.
The National Women’s Day celebrations will take place at Galeshewe Stadium, Kimberley in the Northern Cape.
Cabinet approved the theme for this year’s celebrations as “Year of OR Tambo: Women united in moving South Africa forward.” Cabinet calls on South Africans to use the month of August to celebrate the role of women in our society.
Cabinet was briefed on the three-year programme to be rolled out by the Moral Regeneration Movement (MRM).
The MRM is mandated to facilitate, encourage and coordinate the programme that seeks to restore the moral fibre of our society.
This movement seeks to revive the spirit of Ubuntu/Botho using both government and civil-society resources.
Cabinet approved the three-year operational programme of the MRM and a phased approach of mainstreaming the moral regeneration programme within government.
Cabinet approved that South Africa submits its bid to host the 2023 Rugby World Cup (RWC).
This will once again afford South Africa an opportunity to showcase the country to the international community.
South Africa has previously hosted world-class events such as the All Africa Games, Cricket World Cup, 2010 FIFA World Cup and many international conferences.
As the country we have learnt from these past experiences particularly the costs overruns and collusion which accompanied 2010.
As a result of this, government refused to sign an open-ended blank cheque which led to South Africa withdrawing its bid to host the Common wealth GamesCabinet was apprised on the spin-offs from such an event.
South Africa already has the requisite infrastructure to host the tournament without allocating a budget for infrastructure development.
Sports is said to be one of the most effective drivers of nation-building and the rugby sports programmes would enhance social cohesion.
The programmes to be rolled out throughout the country leading to 2023 will leave a lasting legacy for the development of rugby in underprivileged communities.
Cabinet has approved the overall proposed package for this tournament which is an economic bid which would minimise the demands on the fiscus as well as stimulate economic activity employment and empowermentThe tournament will contribute to stimulating our economy by supporting government priorities, especially as it relates to preferential procurement and adherence to the Sport Transformation Charter and the sharing of the profits derived.
The event will further boost our tourism and hospitality sector.
Cabinet approved the establishment of the Inter-Ministerial Committee (IMC) on WRC 2023.
The IMC will direct the bidding process for the RWC 2023 and ensure the country benefits economically from this event.
The Minister of Sport and Recreation, Mr Thulas Nxesi, will hold a separate media briefing to unpack the bidding process.
Cabinet approved the Draft Intellectual Property (IP) Policy of South Africa – Phase I (2017) for publication in the Government Gazette for public comments.
This responds to the National Development Plan’s call for greater emphasis on innovation, improved productivity, more intense pursuit of a knowledge economy, and better exploitation of comparative and competitive advantages.
The IP Policy is an important policy instrument in promoting innovation, technology transfer, research and development, creative expression, consumer protection, industrial development and more broadly, economic growth.
Cabinet approved the Draft Green Transport Strategy to be published for public comments.
This strategy will form the cornerstone of policy development within the transport sector regarding the lowering of the GHG emissions.
The aim of this strategy is to minimize the adverse impact of transport on the environment while addressing current and future transport demands based on sustainable development principles.
Transport systems form the backbone of South Africa’s socio-economic activities by enabling the movement of people and goods.
However, emissions from the transport sector account for 10.8% of the country’s total greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, with road transport being responsible for 91.2% of these GHG emissions.
South Africa has pledged a GHG emissions reduction target of 34% by 2020 and 42% by 2025.
Cabinet approved that the Department of Home Affairs can reopen the reapplication process for the current Zimbabwean Special Permit holders, under certain conditions.
The initial Special Dispensation for Zimbabweans was approved in April 2009 to document Zimbabwean nationals who were in South Africa illegally.
Their permits expire on the 31 December 2017.
The Minister of Home Affairs, ProfHlengiwe Mkhize, will hold a separate briefing to explain the conditions and the process to be followed once the reapplication opens.
Cabinet approved the South African Mint Company’s designs for the 2017 commemorative colour coins series: Flowers and Birds of the Cape West Coast Biosphere Reserve.
This is an addition to the commemorative and circulation coin ranges to be issued in Bills.
Cabinet approved publication of the Deeds Registries Amendment Bill of 2017 for public comments.
It amends the Deeds Registries Act, 1937 (Act 47 of 1937), so as to improve and enhance application and implementation of the Act.
The Bill will also streamline and enhance the administration and registration of deeds.
Condolences Cabinet expressed its condolences to the families of the two soccer fans who lost their lives during the stampede at the FNB Stadium on Saturday, 29 July 2017.
President Jacob Zuma has constituted a Ministerial Committee of Enquiry, headed by Minister Nxesi, to investigate the circumstances that led to this tragedy.
AppointmentsAll appointments are subject to the verification of qualifications and the relevant clearance.1 Mr Lefentse Cuitzen Radikeledi reappointed as National Treasury representative to the Board of the Export Credit Insurance Corporation of South Africa SOC Limited.2 Extension of the term of office of Ms Thabang Charlotte Christine Mampane as the Commissioner of the National Lotteries Commission (NLC).3 ProfNtshengedzeni Alfred Nevhutanda reappointed as Chairperson to the NLC.4 Ms Fadila Ethne Lagadien as a member of the Arts, Culture and National Historical, Natural, Cultural and Architectural Heritage Distributing Agency of the Board of the NLC.5 Mr Sunrise Vusumuzi Mkhize as Director-General (DG) of the Department of Arts and Culture.
Ms Thathakahle Jordan-Dyani as Deputy DG: ICT International Affairs and Trade at the Department of Telecommunications and Postal Services.7 Reappointment and appointment of non-executive directors of the Board of the Development Bank of Southern Africa for three years (until 31 July 2020):.1 Ms Anuradha Sing (reappointment).2 Ms Gugu Mtetwa (reappointment).3 ProfMark Swilling (reappointment).4 Ms Zanele Monnakgotla (appointment).5 Mr Lufuno Motsherane (appointment).6 Ms Bulelwa Ndamase (appointment).7 Ms Pinkie Nqeto (appointment).8 Ms Letlhogonolo Meko (appointment) and.9 Mr Blessing Mudavanhu (appointment)4.8 Appointment and reappointment of non-executive directors of the Board of the Public Investment Corporation SOC Limited for three years (until 31 July 2020):.1 Dr Xolani H Mkhwanazi (Deputy Chairperson) (appointment).2 Ms Mathukana Mokoka (appointment).3 Ms Dudu Hlatshwayo (reappointment).4 Ms Sibusisiwe N Ngubane (reappointment) and.5 Dr Trueman Goba (reappointment).Enquiries:Ms Phumla WilliamsActing Director-General (GCIS)Cell: 083 501 0139
