Cabinet met on Wednesday, 10 October 2018 at Tuynhuys in Cape Town.A. Issues in the environment1. Economy and investment drive1.1. Cabinet welcomes the practical interventions such as the commitment to buy local products, a more aggressive approach to increasing exports, interventions in agricultural value chains and support for small and medium enterprises.  These announcements came out of the recent two-day Job Summit, which was convened under the National Economic Development and Labour Council.1.2 The outcome of the Job Summit follows the announcement of the Economic Stimulus and Recovery Plan, which seeks to restore economic growth and create much-needed jobs. The new Mining Charter – which was finalised in consultation with the mining industry, labour, affected communities and other stakeholders – clarifies the imperatives of growth, sustainability and transformation.1.3. Cabinet calls on all stakeholders to engage with the Mining Charter so as to finalise and create stability in the mining sector. 2. Kokstad Home Affairs office and handover of title deeds2.1. Cabinet joins President Cyril Ramaphosa in commending the Department of Home Affairs for successfully opening its Kokstad office in KwaZulu-Natal. The President opened the Home Affairs office as part of government’s programme to expand the footprint of Home Affairs service-delivery points to meet citizens’ demands for Smart ID cards and other documents.2.2. Furthermore, President Ramaphosa handed over 443 title deeds to beneficiaries of the Franklin Housing Project. This is part of the restoration programme to ensure beneficiaries experience the full benefits of owning a house and are able to access the formal property market.2.3. Cabinet also takes this opportunity to strongly encourage citizens to collect their IDs as soon as they receive a notification of collection.3. Settlement agreement on spectrum3.1. Cabinet welcomes the settlement agreement reached in the matter involving the Invitation to Apply for the allocation of high-demand spectrum. This provides policy certainty in the information and communications technology (ICT) sector.3.2. The settlement agreement is in line with President Ramaphosa’s call to initiate the process for the allocation of high-demand radio spectrum licensing.3.3. In further contributing to the implementation of the National Integrated ICT Policy White Paper, interested parties have until 8 November 2018 to provide written inputs on the proposed policy and policy direction to the authority.4. South Africa’s first small-scale fisheries cooperatives4.1. Cabinet welcomes South Africa’s first small-scale cooperatives in the fishing sector, namely the Port Nolloth and Hondeklipbaai cooperatives in the Northern Cape, which were launched by the Minister of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries, Mr Senzeni Zokwana.4.2. The launch marks the implementation of the small-scale fisheries policy. The fishing rights give dignity to local fishermen, who have been fishing illegally, in that they are now protected for the first time.4.3 The two small-scale fishing communities who will be benefiting from this policy have received basic training on cooperatives and have been assisted to register cooperatives for the purpose of applying for 15-year fishing rights.5. Tax season5.1. Cabinet commends the close to three million taxpayers who have filed their tax returns, of which over half were submitted through eFiling. On 31 October, the 2018 tax season closes for non-provisional taxpayers and for those provisional taxpayers who opt to file at a South African Revenue Service branch. Provisional taxpayers who opt to file their returns through eFiling have until 31 January 2019 to do so.5.2. Proper and efficient revenue collection ensures fiscal sovereignty, and timeous and accurate submissions ensure compliant taxpayers. Tax revenue helps government to fund the country’s service-delivery projects and other socio-economic development programmes.6. Social-grant payments6.1. Cabinet was brief by the Inter-Ministerial Committee: Social Grants, chaired by Minister Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma.   As of the 1st October 2018, more than 10 million beneficiaries were paid using either of these platforms - the South African Post Office (SAPO)/Postbank; Grinrod Bank as well as merchants such as Boxer, Shoprite, and Pick ’n Pay.6.2. Government has successfully migrated social-grant payments from Cash Paymaster Services (CPS) as instructed by the Constitutional Court Judgement. All cash beneficiaries effected by CPS have been migrated and CPS has been notified of the termination of the contract as of 30 September 2018.6.3. Cabinet extends its appreciation to the diligent oversight work led by the Inter-Ministerial Committee supported by the Technical Task Team of Directors General.   It further extends its appreciation to the work of the officials from SAPO, South African Social Security Agency and, the departments of Social Development; Telecommunications and Postal Services; Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation; National Treasury; South African Police Service and GCIS.6.4. Cabinet thanks all the social-grant beneficiaries for their cooperation during this transition.7. Albertina Sisulu Centenary7.1. Cabinet was briefed on the preparations for the centenary celebration of Mama Albertina Sisulu that will take place during her birth month, October. Mama Sisulu was born on 21 October 1918 and the Chairperson of the IMC on Centenary Celebrations, Minister Jeff Radebe, is here to outline upcoming activities related to the centenary celebration.8. Sentencing of Springs father8.1. Cabinet welcomes the sentencing of the abusive man, commonly referred to as the Springs Monster. He was sentenced to 35 years in jail for the attempted murder of his son, child abuse and neglect, as well as using and dealing in drugs. Gender-based violence remains a serious challenge in our society, as demonstrated by the recent rape of a minor at a Dros restaurant in Silverton.  8.2. Cabinet reiterates calls on law-enforcement authorities to leave no stone unturned in prosecuting perpetrators of these heinous crimes. It further calls on all of us to work together in stopping the violation of the rights of children and the most vulnerable members of our society.9. Westbury protest9.1. Cabinet welcomes the intervention in Westbury by Police Minister Bheki Cele, which is part of the broader strategy to fight the scourge of drugs and gang-related violence in the area.9.2. The intervention includes the deployment of the Tactical Response Team and a greater visible policing presence. Importantly, there will also be an investigation into allegations of corruption at the Westbury Police Station.9.3. Cabinet calls on the Westbury community and all communities to work with the police in ensuring that we root out acts of criminality, drugs and gangsters in their respective areas. 10. Crime10.1. Cabinet commends the law-enforcement agencies in carrying out an intensive multi-disciplinary investigation relating to incidents at shopping malls, retail stores and mosques which has resulted in the arrest of nineteen suspects.  It involved the Justice, Crime Prevention and Security Cluster.  Three of the suspects were arrested in relation to incendiary devices in the Durban area, including the Verulam Mosque. All the suspects are expected to face charges including murder and attempted murder and contravening the Explosives Act.10.2. Cabinet reassures South Africans that fighting crime is a top priority and that government will continue to take necessary steps to ensure a safe and secure environment for all inhabitants of South Africa.11. Name changes: Makhanda11.1. Cabinet welcomes the name change of Grahamstown, in the Eastern Cape, to Makhanda, in honour of Xhosa prophet, philosopher and military man who fought against colonialism.11.2. The change is an important part of our democratic journey and will help to foster greater social cohesion and build a deeper appreciation of our shared history.B. Cabinet decisionsCabinet approved a revised delivery model on implementation of the Broadcast Digital Migration Project. The model adopts a market/retail-driven approach through collaboration and partnerships with the private sector and industry. With this approach, government will no longer be involved in the procurement of set-top-boxes, warehousing, transportation and installation of devices. This provides South Africa with headway towards the completion of the project in a manner that is inclusive, affordable and efficient, and that reduces risk to government. This will push digital viewership migration to the 85% threshold and beyond, towards switching off all analogue broadcasts.Cabinet approved South Africa’s Common Core Document, which will be deposited with the United Nations (UN). The document provides progress which contains information of a general, factual and statistical nature on South Africa’s adherence to the obligations attached to the signed nine UN treaties.C. Upcoming eventsMedium Term Budget Policy Statement (MTBPS)Finance Minister Tito Mboweni will deliver the Medium Term Budget Policy Statement (MTBPS) on Wednesday, 24 October 2018, which will reveal adjustments to the national budget to ensure fiscal sustainability.Transport MonthThis year’s Transport Month programme will emphasise the importance of transport infrastructure, such as the maritime, aviation, rail and road sectors as enablers of economic growth.Cabinet calls on the public to use public transport and actively implement road safety initiatives throughout the year. Let us use the month to celebrate and restore the culture of lift clubs when travelling to work to reduce congestion in our roads. Road safety on our roads remains a challenge, and drivers and pedestrians should use public roads responsibly.D. MessagesCongratulationsSouth Africa’s radio telescope, MeerKAT, will be joining Breakthrough Listen, an international initiative that is seeking signs of intelligent life in the universe. It demonstrates our internationally recognised expertise and infrastructure. South Africa’s 64-dish MeerKAT radio telescope, inaugurated in July this year, is the most sensitive telescope of its kind in the world.Cabinet congratulates the team of researchers from Wits University who performed a historic and successful liver transplant from a HIV-positive mother to her HIV-negative child.  The team of doctors included Professor Jean Botha, Dr Francesca Conradie, Dr Harriet Etheredge, Dr June Fabian and Professor Caroline Tiemessen.Cabinet congratulates the people of Equatorial Guinea on their 50th independence celebration.  South Africa has enjoyed full diplomatic relations with the Republic of Equatorial Guinea since 5 May 1993.CondolencesCabinet extends its condolences to the family, friends and colleagues of the late Environmental Affairs Minister Boma Edna Molewa. Minister Molewa distinguished herself in many capacities and causes, from her contribution to our liberation to fighting for the equality of women in our society. She was also a national and global champion for the environmental integrity of a sustainable planet which can be shared and enjoyed by all.Cabinet sends its condolences to the government and people of Indonesia. Government has already pledged its support, where necessary, and Cabinet commends the South African aid workers who are involved in relief efforts in the Indonesian Island of Sulawesi, which was hit by an earthquake and tsunami.Cabinet extends condolences to the family and colleagues of Ms Rowena Baird who passed away this week.  Ms Baird was a renowned radio journalist and personality.AppointmentsAll appointments are subject to the verification of qualifications and the relevant clearance.International Trade Administration Commission:Dr F Ismail (Chairperson);Mr B Mokgatle;Ms T van Meelis;Mr ED Vlok;Ms P Mbiko;Mr JC de Beer;Ms VNN Ncwaiba;Mr W Sihlobo; andMs AV Hlatshwayo.Enquiries:Ms Phumla Williams, Acting Cabinet SpokespersonCell: 083 501 0139 
