A. Issues in the environment1. State of the Nation Address (SoNA)1.1. Cabinet reaffirmed President Cyril Ramaphosa’s clarion call made in his 2023 State of the Nation Address for all South Africans to work together and leave no one behind as we tackle our country’s pressing challenges.1.2. The President’s bold measures put energy at the forefront of government’s plan of action for the year to deal decisively with load-shedding and secure a sustainable energy supply.1.3. Cabinet urged all sectors of society to support the initiatives outlined in the SoNA by the President, which are critical to sustaining our efforts to reduce unemployment, poverty and the rising cost of living as well as combat crime and corruption.1.4. Government is determined to accelerate the work already underway to increase energy supply to the national grid and our task is to remove any impediments to that progress.1.5. In the next few weeks, cluster briefings will provide more information on government’s Programme of Action (PoA) for the year ahead, as highlighted by President Ramaphosa in the SoNA. The National Budget to be presented on Wednesday, 22 February 2023 will provide further information on government’s PoA.2. African Mining Indaba 20232.1. Cabinet noted the outcomes of the African Mining Indaba held at the Cape Town International Convention Centre from 6 to 9 February 2023 under the theme: “Unlocking African Mining Investment: Stability, Security and Supply”.2.2. The African Mining Indaba brought together industry players from across the continent and the globe, and cemented its place as the premier mining investment conference on the continent. Mining continues to play a pivotal role in development and industrialisation across the continent. It is an important contributor to job creation and retention, accounting for close to half a million direct jobs and close to a million indirect jobs in South Africa.2.3. Mining production in South Africa last year reached a record high of R1.18 trillion, boosting our gross domestic product, exports and revenue. Cabinet calls on all role players in the industry to continue working with government to realise a globally competitive industry that boosts economic growth, creates jobs and drives sustainable development.3. Floods3.1. Cabinet expressed its condolences to the families who have lost loved ones in the recent devastating floods which hit several parts of our country.3.2. We thank our emergency and rescue services across the country who have worked tirelessly to save lives. Let us come together as a nation and offer assistance to those who are in desperate need of care and support.3.4. Cabinet urged people to stay indoors in cases of heavy rain and stormy weather, and reminded those who live in low-lying areas to take extra caution.3.5. People are cautioned not to walk, swim or drive through fast-moving floodwater or cross flooded roads, bridges and rivers. Cabinet urged members of the public to ensure that children are always safe from drowning during floods.4. Gun violence4.1. Cabinet expressed its condolences to the family and friends of hip-hop artist Mr Kiernan Forbes, popularly known as AKA, and celebrity chef Mr Tebello Motsoane, who were recently gunned down in Durban.4.2. Cabinet also expressed its sympathies to the family and friends of anti-crime activist Mr Ayob Mungalee, who was recently shot dead at Eldorado Park in Johannesburg. He was the national director of the People Seeking Justice Action Group, a movement which mobilised community members to take a stand against gangsterism and drug dealing.4.3. Cabinet expressed condolences to the families and friends of those killed in recent mass shootings in the Western Cape, KwaZulu-Natal and the Eastern Cape. These heinous and cold-blooded attacks, which are being investigated by law-enforcement authorities, highlight the prevalence of gun violence and its impact on communities. 4.4. Cabinet reassures South Africans that the South African Police Service (SAPS) is being strengthened to prevent crime. This includes putting more police on the streets and setting up specialised teams that will focus on specific types of crime. South Africa will also use data driven methods in a more sophisticated way to identify and target crime hotspots.4.5. The SAPS is intensifying operations to detect and remove illegal firearms and ammunition from the hands of criminals. The police have in the past 12 months permanently removed 65 519 firearms from circulation.4.6. Government calls on all citizens and community structures to work together with their local SAPS to drive crime out of communities. If you have information that can help expose people involved in illegal activities, call Crime Stop at 0800 10111.5. Enoch Mgijima Local Municipality (EMLM)5.1. Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs Minister Nkosazana Dlamini Zuma and Finance Minister Enoch Godongwana briefed Cabinet on recent consultative engagements held with key role players and stakeholders in the EMLM.5.2. In April 2022, Cabinet approved an intervention in the EMLM in terms of Section 139(7) of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa of 1996, read together with Section 150 of the Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act 56 of 2003). The EMLM had been experiencing significant financial and service delivery failures for a long time before the intervention.5.3. Cabinet expressed its appreciation of the serious issues identified by stakeholders and has assured residents of the EMLM that a decision on how to address the municipality’s current challenges would be communicated soon.6. Safety at schools6.1. School safety in South Africa remains a top priority for government and reports of violence between learners and educators are a serious cause for concern.6.2. While the Department of Basic Education has put mechanisms in place to combat this scourge, it is the responsibility of parents and guardians to collaborate with school authorities and learners to ensure that schools remain safe places for our learners to develop and become responsible citizens. The safety of our educators at schools is also of paramount importance.7. Road Safety7.1. Cabinet remains concerned at the extent of road carnages across the country. Government will be exploring new laws to curb truck crashes, one of which includes moving cargo from road to rail, in the hope that this would take pressure off of road freight.7.2. Cabinet appeals to all road users to obey the rules of the road by being vigilant, considerate and patient towards other road users. Drivers under the influence of alcohol or drugs as well as reckless and negligent driving, including speeding, are responsible for most road accidents.B. Bills1. One-Stop Border Post (OSBP) Bill of 20221.1. Cabinet approved the OSBP Bill for public comments. The Bill follows approval of the OSBP Policy and its implementation strategy in March 2022. It seeks to harmonise the movement of people and goods between South Africa’s land ports of entry and its neighbouring countries.1.2. This will alleviate current congestions at our land ports of entry for cross-border travellers and traders. These interventions are also key in the country’s efforts in driving the African Continental Free Trade Area (AfCFTA) Agreement.1.3. The agreements envisioned in the Bill will ensure that the processing of goods, vehicles and people is seamless and fast. The Bill also responds to relevant international legal instruments that relate to trade facilitation, and movements of people and goods.2. National Identification and Registration Bill of 20222.1. Cabinet approved the publication of the National Identification and Registration Bill of 2022 for public comments. This Bill gives effect to the Official Identity Management Policy and seeks to provide a single, inclusive and integrated digital national identification system for all people who live or have lived in the country.2.2. The draft Bill will provide for the compilation and maintenance of a population register for citizens and permanent residents. It further provides for the creation of an identification data base for certain foreigners who sojourn temporarily in the country.  It also provides for a biometric National Identity System (NIS) that will enable a single view of a person by providing for particulars to be included in the population register and the identification database.2.3. The NIS will also be able to interface with other government and private sector identity systems.2.4. Both the OSBP Bill of 2022 and National Identification and Registration Bill of 2022 will be published in the Department of Home Affairs website: www.dha.gov.za.  Members of the public are encouraged to submit written comments to the following address: The Director-General of Home Affairs, Private Bag X114, Pretoria, 0001.Tel: 012 406 4353.C. Upcoming Events1. African Union (AU) Summit1.1. President Cyril Ramaphosa will attend the 36th Ordinary Session of the Assembly of the Heads of State and Government of the AU to be held from 18 to 19 February in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.1.2. The AU Assembly, which will be held under the theme “Acceleration of AfCFTA Implementation”, will be preceded by the 42nd Ordinary Session of the Executive Council from 15 to 16 February 2023. The Heads of State and Government of the AU will use the theme to reaffirm their commitment to the full implementation of the AfCFTA.2. State Visit by the President of Uganda2.1. HE President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni of Uganda will undertake a State visit to South Africa on Tuesday, 28 February 2023, at the invitation of his counterpart, President Ramaphosa. The purpose of the State Visit is to consolidate bilateral relations between the two countries. It will culminate in a Business Forum to explore trade and investment contracts between the two countries.3. 2023 Southern African Development Community (SADC) Media Awards 3.1. Cabinet reminds all media that entries into the 2023 SADC Media Awards, which closes on Tuesday, 28 February 2023, are open to all journalists from SADC member states.3.2. The SADC Media Awards recognise best media work in the areas of print, photo, television and radio in disseminating information on SADC to support the process of regional cooperation and integration in the region.D. Congratulations1. Cabinet extended its congratulations and well-wishes to:Nomcebo Zikode, Zakes Bantwini and Wouter Kellerman for winning best global music performance for their song, Bayethe, at the 65th Annual Grammy Awards.E. CondolencesCabinet expressed condolences to the family and friends of:the people who died recently when a bus collided with a cash-in-transit vehicle on the N1 highway in Limpopo. Cabinet wished those injured in the accident a speedy recovery.John Moeti (56), the former Bafana Bafana and Orlando Pirates player, who was an integral part of the 1996 Africa Cup of Nations winning team.Cabinet also expressed condolences to the governments and people of Türkiye and Syria who suffered large-scale loss of life and vast damage to social and economic infrastructure following a severe earthquake on 6 February 2023 measuring 7.8 on the Richter Scale. Our hearts go out to families who have lost loved ones or are searching for relatives. Cabinet commends the South African humanitarian aid organisations which have joined the international response. Cabinet applauded the South African Police Service K-9 unit members whose brave efforts, among others, resulted in the rescue of an 80-year-old woman who survived under rubble for over eight days in Türkiye.F. AppointmentsAll appointments are subject to the verification of qualifications and the relevant clearance.1. Ms Azola Mayekiso as Chief Executive Officer (CEO) of the National Housing Finance Corporation.2. Mr Lucas Thabiso Thiti as Deputy Director-General (DDG): Institutional Development and Support in the Department of Justice and Constitutional Development.3. Ms Boitumelo Mosako as CEO of the Development Bank of Southern Africa.4. Mr Kabelo Rikhotso as Executive Director of the Public Investment Corporation Board.5. Mr Matsemela Moloi as Registrar of the Road Traffic Infringement Agency.6. Adv Sonwabile Mancotywa as Non-Executive Director and Chairperson of the Cross-Border Road Transport Agency Board.Enquiries:Mr Michael CurrinActing Cabinet SpokespersonMobile: 082 462 7896
