1.
Cabinet’s position on prominent issues in the current environment Cabinet wishes President Nelson Mandela a speedy recovery and reassures the nation that he is receiving the best medical care.
Cabinet is pleased that he is responding well to treatment and reiterates the request for the media and the public to respect the privacy of the former President and his family during this period.
Cabinet commends the work of the Justice, Crime, Prevention and Security Cluster’s Anti-Corruption Task Team (ACTT) which was established by President Jacob Zuma in 2010.
For the first time in the history of our democracy, criminals who had abused public trust and resources were made known and held accountable for their actions publicly.
South Africa’s zero tolerance to corruption takes us closer to our vision for 2030 where South African society is characterised by high ethical standards and integrity.
This aggressive stance aims to deter people in the private and public sectors from engaging in corrupt and criminal activities and is driven by our commitment to ensure that all citizens are and feel safe.
Cabinet condemns in the strongest terms the recent acts of racism in some parts of our country.
There is no room for racism in our country and democracy, let alone in our schools, where the values of our Constitution ought to be promoted and defended.
Cabinet commends the Department of Basic Education for its quick action in dealing with racism in schools and encourages all parents, pupils, and teachers to report racism and abuse at schools.
Cabinet calls on all South Africans to work together with government to get deal with racism whenever it occurs in our society.
Cabinet welcomes the visit to the Republic of South Africa by the President of the United States of America (US), Barack Obama which is part of a three-nation visit to Senegal, Tanzania and South Africa between 26 June and 3 July 2013.
Our strategic political dialogue with the United States continues to positively impact our bilateral relations.
The US remains an important trade, investment, tourism and technology partner.
Cabinet commended the landmark meeting on the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme (KPCS) held between 4 and 7 June 2013 in Kimberley.
The Summit discussed amongst other things ways of strengthening the effectiveness of the rough diamond certification scheme.
This is to ensure that diamond trade does not finance violence by rebel movements and their allies that seek to undermine legitimate governments.
Recommendations from this meeting will be considered at the plenary meeting of the KPCS to be held later this year.
Cabinet noted that the commemoration of Youth Day which in 2013 marks the 37th anniversary of June 16 Soweto Uprising will be celebrated under the theme “Working together for youth development and a drug free South Africa”.
Cabinet acknowledged the sacrifices made by the class of 1976 in turning the history of the country and setting South Africa firmly on the road to democracy.
Cabinet reiterated that, while the youth of 1976 fought for freedom and the creation of a democratic state, today’s youth activism is directed towards successfully tackling the challenges of combating poverty, unemployment, HIV and AIDS, personal development and drug abuse.
Cabinet encourages all South Africans and organisations to work together to improve the lives of young people and fight to remove the drug dealers within our communities.
The national Youth Day commemoration will take place on Sunday, 16 June 2013 in Newcastle, KwaZulu-Natal.
Cabinet congratulates the Congress of South African Students (Cosas) on its 34th anniversary, which has its roots in the Soweto 1976 struggle for free, quality and relevant education.
The country joins Cosas in celebrating its remarkable achievements and in advancing quality education for all.
Cabinet also commends the leadership of Cosas for taking the initiative to rally young people against drug abuse.
Cabinet condemns the acts of public dumping of human waste in the Western Cape by the protestors against portable bucket toilets.
While, Government respects citizens’ right to protest, this particular form of protest is undignified and poses a serious health risk to communities and to the protesters themselves.
Cabinet calls on citizens to raise their grievances constructively and to treat public institutions with utmost respect irrespective of their grievances.
Cabinet further called on authorities to speedily address issues in a manner that is in keeping with our Constitution.
Government, under the leadership of Deputy President Kgalema Motlanthe, met with religious leaders representing the South Africa Council of Churches and the South African Catholic Bishops' Conference (SACBC) to discuss their concerns that the Gauteng Freeway Improvement Project (GFIP) will impact on the poor and that government was insensitive to the needs of the poor.
Cabinet re-iterates that government has exempted registered public transport (which is largely used by the poor) from the toll tariffs on the Gauteng toll roads.
Also, to address the concerns of the other motorist, government has reduced the tariffs and introduced new capped amounts for all categories of vehicles.
Cabinet encourages motorists in Gauteng to register for e-tags and to view this project as part of the country's drive to build public infrastructure.
Cabinet congratulates Bafana Bafana and Banyana Banyana Soccer Teams and the Proteas Cricket Team on their recent wins in football and cricket.
Cabinet congratulates the national teams on their hard-fought victories over the past week and encourages all South Africans to support our national teams.
Cabinet welcomed the launch of Power FM, a new talk-radio station, as a new player in the industry.
Cabinet noted that the station will deal with politics, social issues and sport in the main and joins a list of radio platforms that can be used to inform South Africans.
Cabinet congratulates the Department of Health Director General, Dr Malebona Precious Matsoso, on her appointment as a member and one of the Vice chairpersons of the World Health Assembly Executive Board for a period of 3 years.
Key Cabinet discussions and decisions Cabinet noted that the Financial Intelligence Centre of South Africa will host the 2013 Annual Plenary and General Working Group Meetings of the Egmont Group of financial intelligence units.
The Egmont Group is an organisation of financial intelligence units from 131 countries.
They meet regularly to enable international cooperation to identify the proceeds of crime, combat money laundering and the financing of terrorism with the objective of defending the integrity of the financial system.
Cabinet noted the election of South Africa to serve on the United Nations Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC) for the period 2013 - 2015.
This presents an opportunity to strategically position South Africa’s leadership on development issues and reinforce the country’s role as a consistent and effective player in multilateralism.
South Africa will also ensure that ECOSOC is further strengthened and reformed to better meet evolving global challenges and the needs of developing countries.
Cabinet noted the report on South Africa’s Non-Permanent membership of the United Nations Security Council from 1 January 2011 to 31 December 2012.The report describes South Africa’s influence in the global governance system in the maintenance of international peace and security.
In line with its values and national interests, South Africa in the UNSC prioritised conflict resolution and peace and stability on the African Continent.
Membership of the UNSC also provided South Africa with an opportunity to strengthen relations with key developing country partners - Brazil, India, Nigeria and China - who shared Council membership with South Africa.
Bills Cabinet approved that the Disaster Management Amendment Bill be published for public comment.
This Bill aims to address the challenges which are being experienced across the spheres of government after commencement of the Disaster Management Act 2002.
The Amendment will re-affirm the function of district municipalities regarding the responsibility to establish capacity for the development and coordination of a disaster management plan.
This includes the implementation of a disaster management function for the municipal area.
The Disaster Management Act 2002 has a fourfold focus: It establishes an elaborate institutional framework for disaster management it entrenches a detailed policy development and strategic planning framework for disaster management.
The bill further provides for the classification and declaration of disaster and it deals provisionally with the funding of post-disaster recovery and rehabilitation.
It provides for disaster management volunteers and a few other ancillary matters.
Cabinet approved the submission of the Local Government Municipal property Rates Amendment Bill to Parliament.
The Local Government: Municipal Property rates Act became effective on 2 July 2005.
It was amended twice in 2008 and 2009.
The amendments seek to remove ambiguity and provide greater legal certainty.
The amendment will allow for transparency in the setting of rates for different property categories, thus enhancing property owners understanding of rating.
The amendment will exclude certain public service infrastructure (PSI) such as roads, railways, airports aprons and runways, dams and breakwater from being rated.
These are publicly controlled and will not disadvantage private sectors.
This would enhance economic activity across municipal boundaries.
It would also contribute to the developmental role of SOEs by reducing their fixed costs.
Cabinet approved a battery of Merchant Shipping Legislation for tabling in Parliament.
These Bills form part of a package of measures designed to give effect to South Africa’s obligations under the International Maritime Organisation Protocol of 1992.
.1 The purpose of the Merchant Shipping (Civil Liability Convention) Bill is to: enact International Maritime Organisation Protocol, 1992 and to pass into law the amended International Convention on Civil Liability for Oil Pollution Damage, 1969.
The Civil Liability Convention establishes and regulates the liability of the registered ship owner.
.2 The aim of the Merchant Shipping (International Oil Pollution Compensation Fund) Bill is to: implement the 1992 Protocol to the International Convention on the Establishment of an International Fund for Compensation for Oil Pollution Damage, 1971 (the Fund Convention).
The Fund Convention establishes an international Fund, called the International Oil Pollution Compensation (IOPC) Fund.
The purpose of the Fund is to pay compensation to victims of pollution damage (within the meaning of the Civil Liability Convention) where they have been unable to obtain compensation, or compensation in full, under the provisions of the Civil Liability Convention.
The IOPC Fund receives its funds from cargo owners.
The Civil Liability and Fund Conventions Bills deal with questions of liability and compensation for loss or damage caused by contamination resulting from the escape or discharge of persistent oil from tankers.
.3 The Merchant Shipping (International Oil Pollution Compensation Fund) Contributions Bill and the Merchant Shipping (International Oil Pollution Compensation Fund) Administration Bill provide for the implementation of the International Maritime Organisation Protocol of 1992 to amend the International Convention on the Establishment of an International Fund for Oil Pollution Damage, by South Africa.
The Administration Bill will provide the necessary legislative authority to enable the South African Revenue Service (SARS) to administer the collection of the International Oil Pollution Compensation Fund Contributions levy.
The Contributions Bill is a money Bill that provides for the imposition and collection of the contributions that are due to be paid over to the Fund.
Appointments Cabinet approved the appointment of seven (7) members for a period of five (5) years with effect from 12 June 2013, to serve on the Sport and Recreation Distributing Agency, in terms of the Lotteries Act (No.
57 of 1997).a.
Dr Vukile Charles Mehanab.
Mr Thandisenzo Aleck Skhosanac.
Ms Muditambi Raveled.
Ms Annamarie Louise van Wieringene.
Ms Krubavathi Jaramf.
Mr Ado Moloabi andg.
Mr Goliath Munro Cabinet approved the appointment of three (3) members for a period of five (5) years with effect from 12 June 2013, to serve on the Arts, Culture and National Heritage Distributing Agency in terms of the Lotteries Act (No 57 of 1997).
a. Ms Hellen Kentse Makgaeb.
Ms Violet Tyamzashe andc.
Ms Brenda Sesane Cabinet approved the re-appointment of two Non-executive Directors to the Board of the Development Bank of South Africa (DBSA) in terms of section 7 of the DBSA Act, (Act 13 of 1997).a.
Mrs Thembisa Dingaanb.
Profssor Omar Latiff Cabinet approved the following Deputy Director-General appointments:a. Ms Maseapo Kganedi Deputy Director-General: Group Services at the Department of Arts and Culture b. Mr Mpho Joseph Mofokeng: Chief Financial Officer: Water Trading Account at the Department of Water Affairs	Enquiries:Phumla Williams, Acting Cabinet SpokespersonCell: 083 501 0139
