Cabinet met on Wednesday, 20 June 2018, at the Union Buildings, Pretoria.A. Issues in the environment1. United Nations Security Council (UNSC)1.1. Cabinet extends appreciation to the members of the United Nations (UN) that  overwhelmingly supported South Africa to serve as a non-permanent member on the UNSC for the term 2019 until 2020.1.2. The election comes after a unanimous resolution to convene a Global Peace Summit in honour of former President Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela in September 2018, which is the centenary year of South Africa’s founding father. Our  membership in the UNSC is dedicated to honour the legacy of Madiba.1.3. South Africa will use its membership to advance the priorities of the African Union Agenda 2063, which is a strategic framework for the socio-economic transformation of the continent over the next 50 years.2. Eskom wage negotiations2.1. Cabinet welcomes the intervention made by Public Enterprises Minister Pravin Gordhan in the wage-negotiations dispute between the Eskom management and labour. The supply of electricity is one of the critical levers in growing our economy and creating more jobs.2.2. Cabinet appeals to all parties to work expeditiously in resolving the wage-increase negotiations for the sake of stability and the economic well-being of the country.  3. Protests on highways3.1. Cabinet strongly condemns the recent blocking of several highways by protestors in some parts of the country. Highways are a critical part of our transport infrastructure that supports the transportation of goods and services of the various sectors of the economy. Our constitutional democracy provides for platforms wherein people can raise their issues without causing any disruptions.3.2. Criminal acts of aggression and disruptions will not be tolerated and Cabinet calls on law-enforcement officers to take the necessary steps, within the confines of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa of 1996, to ensure that perpetrators are brought to justice. B. Cabinet decisions4. Programme of Action Briefing Week4.1. Cabinet was apprised on the bi-annual performance progress reports for the period starting 1 October 2017 until 30 March 2018. Cabinet appreciated the progress made in a number of sub-outcomes of the 14 priority targets and also approved the proposed interventions in some of the areas that showed less progress. All the clusters will conduct media briefings to unpack the progress and areas that require interventions.  4.2. The GCIS will coordinate the cluster media briefings and publish the schedule on www.gov.za in due course.5. Briefing on the mining consultations5.1. Cabinet was briefed by Mineral Resources Minister Gwede Mantashe on the two-day meeting held in March 2018 with social partners represented by   organised business and organised labour. All the social partners agreed on the need to resuscitate social dialogue in the mining sector and identify critical interventions required to ensure the mining sector is placed on a trajectory of inclusive and sustainable growth.5.2. The social partners further reflected on the last quarter decline in the mining production as well as the broader trends regarding mining investment, production and employment. They agreed on the need to reflect on the shared vision for the mining sector, and re-endorsed the complementarities and interdependencies between transformation and competitiveness. 5.3. Cabinet was also briefed on the two multi-stakeholder teams established to finalise the Mining Charter. Once all the consultation processes have been finalised, the charter will be presented to Cabinet for final adoption.6. Draft National Budget Framework for 2019 (Mandate Paper)6.1. Cabinet approved the release of the Budget Prioritisation Framework for Budget 2019 and also the timelines for the completion of the Budget Prioritisation Framework for Budget 2020.  6.2. The framework proposes the priority programmes for Budget 2019 that will enable government to tackle the triple challenges of poverty, unemployment and inequality within the available resources.7. Energy  7.1.  Cabinet approved the Decommissioning and Decontamination liabilities attached to the past Disused Strategic Nuclear Facilities (Stage 1) and current operating facilities (Stage 2) at Phelindaba site.These liabilities are currently reflected in the books of the South African Nuclear Energy Corporation. Cabinet approved that the process should be taken forward in consultation with the National Treasury.C. Upcoming events8. World Economic Forum (WEF) Roundtable8.1. President Cyril Ramaphosa will host the WEF Roundtable at the Park Hyatt Hotel in Rosebank on 28 June 2018 under the theme: “Shaping South Africa’s Economic Renewal - the role of Business.” The event will bring together about 100 local and foreign business people and South African Government officials to engage on investment opportunities and partnerships.8.2.    The meeting with the WEF business community is a precursor to government’s Investment Conference planned for later in the year, which aims to mobilise investment of US$100 billion over five years.9. Southern African Customs Union (SACU) Summit9.1. President Ramaphosa will lead a delegation that will attend the SACU Summit to be held on 29 June 2018 in Botswana. The President will use the gathering to meet the Southern African Development Community (SADC) Secretariat to discuss the implementation of regional programmes.  9.2. As the current Chair of SADC, South Africa has consistently supported broader regional integration through the SACU and SADC, and champions regional industrialisation and integration through various potential growth paths.10. Water Institute of South Africa (WISA) Conference10.1. The WISA 2018 Biennial Conference and Exhibition will be held from 24 to 27 June 2018 in Cape Town. The Southern African region faces increased uncertainty and vulnerability regarding water supply, and many parts of South Africa have recently experienced prolonged drought conditions.10.2. The conference is expected to attract 2 000 delegates who will discuss ways to ensure the achievement of the UN Sustainable Development Goal number six, which centres around providing access to clean water and sanitation for all by 2030.D. Messages11. CondolencesCabinet expressed its deepest condolences to:11.1. The family and friends of Honourable Sibusiso Radebe, an African National Congress Member of Parliament from Mpumalanga, who was killed during a hijacking attempt in Gauteng. Honourable Radebe will be remembered as a youth activist who worked hard to improve the lives of South Africans.11.2. Family and friends of Ms Joyce Mashamba, who at the time of her passing was the MEC for Agriculture in Limpopo. The former freedom fighter served as an MEC in different provincial portfolios since the dawn of democracy.11.3. Family and friends of Mr Billy Modise, who was South Africa’s former Chief of State Protocol and recipient of the National Order for Luthuli. He is well known for his work in building the anti-apartheid movement in the Nordic countries during the 1960s.  11.4. The families of the three miners who died at Sibanye-Stillwater’s Kloof Ikamva Mine near Westonaria in Gauteng and calls on all stakeholders in the sector to continue to prioritise safety in our mines.11.5. The Amampondo community on the passing of the Queen Mother of Amampondo aseNyandeni, Queen Fikelephi ‘Bongolethu’ Ndamase.11.6. The families and friends of Mr Ismail Bassa and Mr Sayaad Hitig, who were killed during an attack on the Malmesbury mosque in the Western Cape.12. CongratulationsCabinet extends its congratulatory message to the following:12.1. Dr Robert Gess, a leading South African researcher on Devonian marginal marine ecosystems and early vertebrates or ancient fish and early tetrapods. He uncovered what is believed to be a 360 million-year-old fossil. The two new species, named Tutusius and Umzantsia, are Africa’s earliest known four-legged vertebrates dating back a remarkable 70 million years. This discovery further cements our place as a world leader in science and research.12.2. Bongumusa Mthembu for defending his Comrades Marathon title and Ann Ashworth for winning the women’s race. Cabinet also congratulates Xolani Luvuno for his determination and perseverance to finish the marathon using his crutches.12.3. Dr Siyabonga Cwele, the Minister of Telecommunications and Postal Services, following his election as the Chairperson of the International Telecommunications Satellite Organisation (ITSO).  South Africa is chairing ITSO for the first time and will hold the position for two years. The country will use its chairpersonship to advance the interest of the African continent and developing nations in multilateral organisations.Enquiries:Ms Phumla Williams – Acting Cabinet SpokespersonCell: 083 501 0139
