From the outset, Cabinet would like to clarify the misperception that President Jacob Zuma has refused to answer questions in Parliament.
Cabinet also noted efforts by Deputy President Cyril Ramaphosa to interact with political parties in the National Assembly following chaotic scenes recently.
The Constitution of the Republic of South Africa stipulates that the President is accountable to Parliament.
The President has continuously fulfilled his role of accounting to Parliament.
He has been answering written and oral questions posed to him by the members in both the National Assembly and the National Council of Provinces.
The President went to orally answer questions in the National Assembly on 21 August 2014.
Unfortunately Honourable Members disrupted him whilst answering the third of six questions posed to him.
It is the Honourable Members who, through their own disrespectful behaviour, disrupted the President as he was answering questions.
Those Honourable Members who prevented the President from orally answering questions in the National Assembly have no moral grounds to twist the facts and suddenly claim that it is the President who does not want to orally reply to their questions.
The National Assembly has since censured those Honourable Members who disrupted the President.
Further, Cabinet is not aware of any Order Paper in the National Assembly which had scheduled the President to answer oral questions after the disruption of his oral replies.
Therefore it cannot be true that the President has refused to answer questions in the National Assembly.
Cabinet remains concerned over the disruptive effect of the recent power outages on the daily lives of South Africans and their impact on households and businesses across the country.
Cabinet has adopted a five-point plan to address the electricity challenges facing the country.
The lack of sufficient capacity to meet the country’s energy needs remains a challenge and all attempts are being made to ensure that we overcome the tight energy WEBTOKEN meet the country’s future energy requirements government is implementing an energy mix which comprises coal, solar, wind, hydro, gas and nuclear energy.
In future biomass, wind power, solar power and hydro-power will contribute Gigawatts of renewable energy to the grid.
Since 1994, five million more households were connected to the grid.
In 2004 this increased to 12 million households.
This happened without additional power stations being built.
This increase of households was set off the existing WEBTOKEN Eskom will sign Memorandum of Understanding with the Strategic Fuel Fund and Transnet Ports Authority so that the country can be assured of a regular supply of diesel.
The focus will be to improve the strategic maintenance and operational efficiency to ensure that the level of efficiency is increased from the current 72% to the target of 80%.
Eskom will present a detailed finance plan to manage its cash flow beyond 2015.
This plan will be presented to the IMC by December 2014.
Simultaneously government will finance the funding model.
Cogeneration (the generation of electricity and useful heat jointly, especially the use of the steam left over from electricity generation for heating) options will be pursued with the sugar paper and pulp industries to harness waste energy to the extent of 1000 megawatts.
There are significant opportunities for the importation of gas.
A coal independent power producer programme will be launched by the end of January 2015 with a generation capacity of 2 500 megawatts.
We are therefore appealing to the public to help our country to reduce the demand of energy, which means switching off electricity when not in use.
We will have some relief from 15 December 2014 when manufacturing and industrial processes close for the year.
A technical team war room for the implementation of the five-point plan has been constituted with immediate effect.
The five-point plan addresses the strain our electricity system faces.
The plan covers:the interventions that Eskom will undertake in the period over the next 30 daysharnessing the cogeneration opportunity through the extension of existing contracts with the private sectoraccelerating the programme for substitution of diesel with gas to fire up the diesel power plantslaunching a coal independent power producer programme andmanaging demand through specific interventions within residential dwellings, public and commercial buildings and municipalities through retrofitting energy efficient technologies.
Cabinet is concerned about the performance of some of the State-owned companies (SoCs), in particular the South African Airways (SAA), South African Post Office (SAPO) and Eskom.
These SOCs play a critical developmental role within the South African economy.
The President has assigned Deputy President Cyril Ramaphosa to oversee the turnaround of the SAA, SAPO and Eskom.
Working with the relevant ministries, the SAA will be transferred from the Department of Public Enterprises to National Treasury.
The Presidency will closely monitor the implementation of the turnaround plans of these three critical SOCs that are drivers of the economy.
Implementation of key government programmes.
Cabinet welcomes the positive outcomes of the President’s State Visit to the People’s Republic of China from 4 to 5 December 2014, which is a true reflection of the deepening bilateral, trade and investment relations between South Africa and China.
South African businesses are urged to take advantage of the new economic opportunities that our relationship with China offers.
Last week’s adoption of the China-South Africa 5-10 Year Framework on Cooperation entrenches implementation of the agreements entered into since the conclusion of the Beijing Declaration in 2010 and expands on the Comprehensive Strategic Partnership.
Cabinet lauds the Department of Basic Education, provincial education departments, principals, teachers and learners for their perseverance as we conclude another busy academic year.
The Minister of Basic Education Angie Motshekga will announce the outcome of the 2014 National Senior Certificate (NSC) examinations on 5 January 2015 and the results will be released to candidates on 6 January 2015.Cabinet encourages learners who qualify for higher education studies to explore all available opportunities.
Those learners who have not yet been accepted at an institution of higher learning at the time of the release of the NSC results should make use of the Central Applications Clearing House (CACH) service in January and February 2015.The CACH service develops a register of potential candidates that meet institutions' minimum admission requirements to all Post-School Education and Training (PSET) institutions in South Africa.
The service also offers career advice and assists prospective applicants with possible alternatives.
The service can be accessed through the call centre on: 0800 356 635 or through an SMS with your name and identity number to Cabinet welcomes the release of the 2014 Annual National Assessments (ANA) last week which shows an upward trend in performance of all grades except Grade 9.The ANA remain a powerful tool to assess the health of our education system and where immediate interventions are required as identified for the Grade 9 learners in mathematics.
Cabinet thanks all South Africans, civil society and the media for their participation in this year’s 16 Days of Activism campaign under the theme: ‘Count me in: Together moving a non-violent South Africa forward’.The call to all South Africans to ‘Count me in’ seeks to ensure the longevity of established partnerships by translating our activism during this period into everyday actions throughout the year so that we can eliminate the scourge of violence against women and children.
South Africa will mark National Reconciliation Day on 16 December 2014 under the theme: ‘Social Cohesion, Reconciliation and National Unity in the 20 Years of Democracy’ at the Ncome Museum in the uMzinyathi District Municipality, KwaZulu-Natal.
Cabinet conveys its gratitude to all South Africans and the international community that commemorated the anniversary of the passing of the country’s first democratically elected President Nelson Mandela on 5 December 2014.We must stay true to Madiba’s legacy by continuing his unwavering dedication to democracy, selflessness, reconciliation, service to humanity and striving for a better life for all.
It is through these values and dedication to the service of humanity that we remain inspired to become a united and prosperous nation.
Key Cabinet decisions.
Cabinet approved that the 2013/14 performance report of the Research and Development (R&D) Tax Incentive programme be tabled in Parliament.
Government offers R&D tax incentive in terms of Section 11D of the Income Tax Act of 1962 in order to encourage private sector R&D activities.
South Africa offers 150% deduction on approved operational expenditure incurred on R&D activities and is recognised to be amongst the countries that offer the more generous tax incentive for R&D.
The incentive which has been in place since November 2006 saw 810 companies participating, as at February 2014.
From 2005/06 to 2012/13 companies reported an estimated R.1 billion R&D expenditure, and National Treasury estimated that just over R3,2 billion was claimed in R&D tax deduction from the South Arican Revenue Service (SARS).
2013/14 saw 44.2% small and medium enterprises (SMEs) with an annual turnover of less than R40 million participating in the R&D tax incentive.
Cabinet was updated on progress made with the MeerKAT project, the collateral benefits that have accrued to the local communities and South Africa, and the international negotiations underway relating to the hosting of the Square Kilometre Array (SKA) project.
The construction of the MeerKAT telescope – the pathfinder to the eventual SKA – is progressing well, with significant opportunities for the local South African industry.
South Africa is driving a number of cutting-edge technology developments, especially in the area of high performance computing.
Local communities in the Northern Cape have also benefitted through the many social investment partnerships.
On the international front, the hosting agreement, the funding model for the SKA and the procurement policy are being discussed and finalised.
Negotiations are also continuing on the establishment of an inter-governmental treaty organisation.
Cabinet approved a joint task team between the Ministers of Science and Technology and Higher Education and Training to identify the required human resources and to ensure that academic and other research institutions are aligned to the development and needs of the MeerKAT, SKA and similar projects.
Cabinet also approved collaboration between the Ministers of Science and Technology and Small Business Development should opportunities arise for empowering and capacitating small and medium enterprises in light of the potential economic impact.
Cabinet approved for Statistics South Africa to conduct stakeholder consultations in preparation for the amendment of the Statistics Act, 1999 (Act 6 of 1999).
Consultations between the organs of state and other relevant organs are necessary to facilitate the development of the series of data collections needed for the National Development Plan (NDP).
Cabinet was briefed on the compliance of members of the Senior Management Service (SMS) with the Financial Disclosure Framework, which is monitored by Parliament.
Of the 5 425 SMS members in national departments who were required to submit their financial disclosures forms for the 2012/13 financial year, the Public Service Commission received 4 413 (81%) by the due date of 31 May 2013.Cabinet highlights that a culture of zero tolerance for non-compliance should be entrenched in the day-to-day functioning of the State.
Cabinet was briefed on the 2013/2014 audit outcomes of the Public Finance Management Act (PFMA) compliant institutions and on the tabling status of their annual reports and financial statements.
There has been an improvement in compliance by institutions on the timeous tabling of their 2013/14 annual reports and financial statements.
For the year under review 417 PFMA compliant institutions were required to table their annual reports and financial statements by 30 September 2014.
A total of 379 institutions (91%) met the deadline which is a 7% improvement from the 353 in the previous year.
Cabinet approved that accounting officers and accounting authorities submit to their relevant executive authorities corrective steps that would be taken to address concerns raised in their audit reports.
Cabinet supports the need for Executive Authorities to monitor the progress made to address concerns raised in Audit Reports and to receive regular updates thereon.
Cabinet approved a range of steps to reform the Supply Chain management (SCM) system.
These include:
SCM performance criteria to be included in the performance agreements of accounting officers as from 1 April 2015
Accounting officers to conduct a capacity review of SCM staff and to take remedial action where required
Accounting officers to brief executive authorities quarterly on the SCM performance in their department, municipalities or entities.
Cabinet also approved for the Office of the Chief Procurement Officer to accelerate the SCM reform by modernising the function in the public service.
The Office of the Chief Procurement Officer has embarked on a strategy to simplify, standardise and automate procurement.
National Treasury will conduct consultations with the National School of Government with a view to develop a curriculum on training and standardisation of professional qualifications.
Cabinet approved the submission of South Africa’s Periodic Report (2002-2013) on the United Nations (UN) International Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman Degrading Treatment or Punishment to the UN Human Rights Council.
Compilation and submission of this report demonstrates governments’ commitment to the global effort to protect and promote human rights.
South Africa fully complies with the convention in that it has criminalised torture, and courts may now prosecute torture in terms of statute and not common law.
The report provides South Africa with an opportunity to assess its compliance or lack thereof with international obligations.
The fight against torture is in line with South Africa’s key priority of ensuring safer communities which is in line with the NDCabinet noted the draft White Paper on the Police.
The 2014 White Paper on Police emanates from a review of the 1998 White Paper on Safety and Security.
The review reassessed how the practice and understanding of crime prevention has developed in South Africa post 1994.The White Paper responds to the NDP Vision 2030 by articulating the need and framework for a professional police service that is skilled, accountable and community-centered.
In addition the police service is required to operate in an integrated manner within the criminal justice system in executing its constitutional mandate.
Cabinet approved that the draft Youth Policy 2014-2019 be made available for public comment.
The draft policy is a progression from the first Youth Policy 2009-2014.
Youth development is at the core of South Africa’s development agenda the NDP has a youth lens aimed at nurturing a demographic dividend.
The 2014-2019 policy ensures that the youth dividend is realised.
Implementation of the policy will intentionally enhance the capabilities of young people to transform the economy and society by addressing their needs for holistic development, particularly those outside the social, political and economic mainstream.
Cabinet also approved publication of the draft National Disability Rights Policy in the Government Gazette for public comment.
This serves to: update the White Paper on an Integrated National Disability Strategy, integrates both the obligations in the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the provisions of the Continental Plan of Action for the African Decade of Persons with Disabilities with South African legislation, policy frameworks and the NDP 2030.
Cabinet approved the proposed vision for the Border Management Agency of South Africa as a basis for the business case and enabling legislation as work in progress.
Cabinet also approved that a pilot site be established and a proper legal framework be put in place.
A two-phased approach will be used to establish the agency:Transition Phase (January 2015-December 2016) – used to start legislative drafting and its enactment and to make government initiatives in the borderline environment more visible.
There will also be a continuation with current collaborative efforts at ports of entry under formalised multiparty agreements to strengthen the Border Control Operational Coordinating Committee’s management WEBTOKEN Phase (January 2017 and beyond) – entails implementation of legislation to operationalise the agency as a public entity in the ports of entry environment and to provide for the expansion of its mandate and functions to include the air, land (Border Guard) and maritime (Coast Guard) border environment.
The experiences of the transitional phase (including the pilot) will better inform the final proposals.
Cabinet approved the relocation of the lead agency role for the Border Control Operational Coordinating Committee from Sars to the Department of Home Affairs.
Cabinet was briefed on the results of a pilot audit on transformation in a sample of National Sport Federations.
This provided the extent to which sport bodies in South Africa have transformed over the last two decades since the targets for transformation in sport were set.
The results will be used by the Department of Sport and Recreation to provide focused support to those federations that need administrative support.
The purpose of the study was to establish a draft framework for evaluating the transformation in the different dimensions of the transformation charter performance levels, demographics, access, skills and capabilities, governance, employment equity, and preferential procurement.
Based on the lessons learnt from the first pilot study, the second phase of the audit began in March 2014.
The scope of this audit covers all 16 priority sport codes.
Cabinet declared an annual National Recreation Day on the first Friday of October each year.
This provides an opportunity to all South Africans to actively be involved by participating in recreation activities that will improve their health and well-being.
A healthy and active citizenry is a key factor in realising the WEBTOKEN fully exploit the potential of recreation, the National Recreation Day needs solidarity, joint activities and cross-sectoral initiatives.
To this end Cabinet also approved the establishment of a National Steering Committee.
Bills.
Cabinet approved publication of the second draft of the Financial Sector Regulation Bill and its submission to Parliament and the release of the Draft Market Conduct Policy Framework for public comment.
The draft framework will enable the public to be better informed when commenting on the Bill.
The second draft of the Financial Sector Regulation Bill, 2014 follows comments received on the first draft which was approved by Cabinet in December 2013.
The aim of the Bill is to make the financial sector safer by implementing the ‘twin peaks’ regulatory system, which is a comprehensive and complete system for regulating the financial sector, prioritising the customer and protecting their funds.
The ‘twin peaks’ approach to financial regulation underpins a comprehensive regulatory system, with two aims:
to strengthen the financial stability and soundness of financial institutions by creating a dedicated ‘Prudential Authority’ (within the South African Reserve Bank) and
to protect financial customers and ensure that they are treated fairly by financial institutions by creating a dedicated Financial Sector Conduct Authority, which also supervises how financial services conduct their business.
The Bill will provide the Financial Sector Conduct Authority and the Prudential Authority’ jurisdiction over all financial institutions and provide them with a range of supervisory tools to fulfil their mandates.
This goes beyond two regulators as it sets up an underlying and harmonised system of licensing, supervision, enforcement, customer complaints (including ombuds), appeal mechanism (tribunal) and consumer advice and education.
The Draft Market Conduct Policy Framework drives fair treatment of customers in the financial sector, which is a key lesson for South Africa from the 2008 Global Financial Crisis.
While South Africa’s financial sector has proven to be resilient, government has recognised that the sector could be delivering better outcomes for financial customers and the economy.
There have been a number of well-known market conduct failings in South Africa’s financial sector, and government has intervened to address these.
However, the persistence of systematic market conduct challenges has highlighted the need for a more comprehensive and holistic approach to addressing the problem of poor conduct across the financial sector in its entirety.
Cabinet approved submission of the Plant Breeders Rights Amendment Bill to Parliament.
The Bill amends the Plant Breeders’ Rights Act, 1976 (Act 15 of 1976).
The Bill aims to strengthen the protection of intellectual property rights relevant to new varieties of plants.
Such protection contributes to economic growth as it has a positive impact on the competitiveness of South Africa’s agricultural sector.
Some of the key amendment proposals include: extending protection to all plant genera and species addressing matters of infringement of plant breeders’ rights through the appropriate fines and penalties and defining the limits and the beneficiaries in the application of farmer’s privilege and empowering the Minister to establish a Plant Breeders’ Rights Advisory Committee to advise the Registrar on matters related to plant variety protection.
Cabinet approved the submission of the Plant Improvement Amendment Bill to Parliament.
The Plant Improvement Act, 1976 (Act 53 of 1976), which has been amended a few times, the last being in 1996, regulates plant improvement in South Africa.
The amendments align the scope and provisions of the Act to the Constitution and other related legislation in the agricultural sector.
The Bill enhances sustainable crop production in South Africa by regulating the quality of plants and seed.
The significance and role of plant improvement legislation lies in recognising the importance of quality plant propagating material to support sustainable production as well as participation in the global market by setting quality standards for plants and seeds and the types of business dealing with plants and seed.
Cabinet approved submission of the Performing Animals Protection Amendment Bill to Parliament.
The Bill amends section 2 and 3 of the Performing Animals Protection Act 1935 (Act 24 of 1935) which were declared unconstitutional insofar as they relate to magistrates deciding on and issuing licences to persons intending to train and exhibit animals and to persons who use dogs for safeguarding.
The Bill proposes to remedy the defect identified by the Constitutional Court by transferring the functions of issuing licences for performing animals from the Judiciary to the Executive.
This is within the context of the Animal Protection Act, 1962 (Act 71 of 1962) which consolidates the laws relating to the prevention of cruelty to animals.
Cabinet’s position on current issues Cabinet calls on all South Africans to join the fight against Ebola by participating in the African Union (AU) SMS resource mobilisation campaign.
The AU Commission has so far raised more than 20 million dollars in donations through its hashtag "#AfricaAgainstEbola" campaign, but more is still needed.
By sending a ‘Stop Ebola’ SMS to 4079.7 South Africans will not only be donating R10 but will also fuel the hope and determination that Ebola can and will be stopped.
Cabinet wishes all a restful, peaceful year-end holiday and urges South Africans to put Ubuntu/Botho in practice by assisting those in our communities that are unable to support themselves and to show compassion as a nation that cares for, and respects each other.
All parents to take care of their children during this period.
Victims of abuse must speak out, report abuse and contact the 24 hour command centre 0800 428 428.Cabinet calls on all South Africans to take every precaution during the upcoming festive season, stay away from the abuse of alcohol and drugs, and to enjoy the holiday period in a safe and responsible manner.
All South Africans have a part to play in curbing incidents of crime, accidents and abuse, which tend to increase during this period.
Cabinet reiterates that traffic officials will have a zero tolerance approach to lawlessness on our roads during this festive season.
We urge all road users to adhere to the speed limit ensure vehicles are roadworthy not to drive intoxicated and to wear safety belts.
Pedestrians are urged to ensure that when using the roads they do not endanger their well-being or that of motorists.
Government will play its part by leading a range of campaigns such as Healthy Lifestyles and Arrive Alive in a bid to partner with communities to promote responsible and safe behaviour.
Cabinet is saddened by the tragic killing of South African teacher Pierre Korkie who was in Yemen, and that of Werner Groenewald, and his two children, Rode and Jean-Pierre who died in an attack in Afghanistan.
Cabinet conveys its condolences to their families and friends.
The work to identify the remaining 11 South Africans who died tragically in the Nigerian building collapse continues and government is intensifying efforts to ensure their remains are brought home without undue delay.
Cabinet conveys its condolences to the Gigaba family on the loss of their father, Reverend Jabulani Gigaba.
He was the father to the Minister of Home Affairs, Mr Malusi Gigaba.
Cabinet also conveys its condolences to the family and friends of Sisi Mabe, who was the Speaker of the Free State Legislature.
Cabinet congratulates the national soccer team Bafana Bafana and coach Ephraim “Shakes” Mashaba on qualifying for the Africa Cup of Nations 2015 in Equatorial Guinea, which begins on 17 January 2015, and calls on all South Africans to support the national team as they fly our flag high.
Cabinet noted the launch of the Human Settlements Youth Brigade on 1-2 December 2014 by the Departments of Human Settlements, Small Business Development, and the National Youth Development Agency (NYDA) at the National Human Settlements Youth Summit.
The summit deliberated on the empowerment programmes of the departments targeting young people and how they can participate in the delivery of houses.
At the end of the summit all stakeholders signed the National Human Settlements Youth Accord which serves as a statement of intent towards creating a holistic and integrated approach to human settlements delivery through youth mobilisation, development and participation in a form of National Human Settlements Youth Brigades.
The intention is to mobilise young people behind the target of million housing opportunities and aims to recruit and train about 10 000 Youth Brigades in the next five years.
Upcoming events.
On 12 December 2014, the President of South Sudan, His Excellency Salva Kiir Mayardit will pay an official visit to South Africa where he will be hosted by President Jacob Zuma in Cape Town.
AppointmentsCabinet approved the following appointments subject to the verification of qualifications and the relevant clearance:.
To the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research Board:a) ProfThokozani Majozi (Chairperson)b) Dr Ramatsemela Masangoc) ProfMamokgethi Phakengd) Dr Philip Hugh Goynse) Dr Ayanda Noahf) Dr Antonio Llobellg) Ms Phindile Balenih) Adv Ghandi Badelai) Mrs Mokgadi Masekoj) Mr Joel Netshitenzhe.
To the Air Services Licensing Council:a) Dr. Malindi Neluheni (Chairperson)b) Ms Kenosi Selane (Vice Chairperson)c) Adv.
Frans Johannes van der Westhuizend) Mr Bheki Innocent Dladlae) Ms Sibongile Rejoyce Sambo.
To the International Air Services Council:a) Adv.
Phetole Patrick Sekhule (Chairperson)b) Dr. Xolani David Gwala (Vice-Chairperson)c) Ms Deshnee Govenderd) Adv.
Lufuno Tokyo Nevondwee) Ms Fulufhelo Velda Mphuti.
To the Board of the Land Bank and Agricultural Development Bank:a) ProfAbdus Salam Mohammad Karaan (re-appointment)b) Ms Susan Ann Lund (re-appointment)c) Mr Mabotha Arthur Moloto (Chairperson)d) Ms Njabulo Zwanee) Ms Dudu Hlatshwayo.
To the Transnet SOC Ltd Board (Non-Executive Directors):a) Ms Linda Carol Mabaso (Chairperson)b) Mr Stanley David Shanec) Mr Mogokare Richard Seleked) Dr Gideon Mahlalelae) Ms Potso Elizabeth Bridgette Mathekgaf) Ms Zainul Abedeen Nagdeeg) Mr Vusi Matthew Nkonyaneh) Mr Peter George Williamsi) Mr Brett Gerard Stagmanj) Ms Yasmin Forbes (reappointment)k) Ms Nazmeera Moola (reappointment).
To the Eskom SOC Ltd Board (Non-Executive Directors):a) Mr Zola Andile Tsotsi (reappointment and Chairperson)b) Ms Chwayita Mabude (reappointment)c) Mr Norman Tinyiko Baloyid) Dr Pathmanathan Naidooe) Ms Venete Jarlene Kleinf) Ms Nazia Carrimg) Mr Romeo Kumaloh) Mr Mark Vivian Pamenskyi) Mr Zethembe Wilfred Khozaj) Dr Baldwin Sipho Ngubanek) Ms Devapushpum Viroshini Naidoo.
Geoff Qhena has been re-appointed as the Chief Executive Officer (CEO) of the Industrial Development Corporation.
Minister Patel will announce the rest of the IDC Board members in the next few days.
Public Service/other appointments:a) Appointment of the CEO of the Land Bank, Mr TP Nchocho with effect from 1 January 2015 on a five year contract to 31 December 2019.b) Appointment of the CEO of the Public Investment Corporation (PIC), Dr Daniel Mmushi Matjila with immediate effect, for a period of five years until 30 November 2019.c) Reappointment of Mr Murray Michell, the Director of the Financial Intelligence Centre (FIC) for a further period of two years, from 1 January 2015 to 31 December 2016.d) Extension of the contract of the Director-General of the Department of Home Affairs, Mr Mkuseli Apleni for a further period of five years, from 1 April 2015 to 31 March 2020.e) Appointment of the Chief Operations Officer of the Department of Rural Development and Land Reform, Mr Marks Charles Thibela.
f) Appointment of the Chief Financial Officer of the Department of Rural Development and Land Reform, Ms Rendani Sadiki.
ConclusionCabinet would like to wish everyone happy holidays and let’s come back energised in 2015 collectively ensure we deliver on the mandate of the government.
Together, we move South Africa forward.
Enquiries:Donald LiphokoCell: 082 901 0766
