1.
Cabinet’s position on prominent issues in the current environment Cabinet joins the nation and the international community in praying for the father of the nation, former President Nelson Mandela.
At this difficult time, let us all show love and compassion and make Madiba proud.
Cabinet noted the 58th anniversary of the signing of the Freedom Charter signed on the 26th June 1955 which is the foundation of our democracy and Constitution.
Cabinet calls on all South Africans to ‘Play Your Part’ in taking the country closer to the vision of a united, non-racial, non-sexist, democratic and prosperous South Africa.
Cabinet welcomes the renewed commitment by the Department of Health, together with researchers, to confront issues that pose challenges to the collective efforts in the fight against HICabinet also welcomes preparations by the Department of Health to introduce a number of new interventions into existing structures which include increased awareness on HIV and AIDS, and measures to decrease the risk of HIV infection.
Cabinet extends condolences following the disgraceful attack on the United Nations (UN) Common Compound in Mogadishu, Somalia on 19 June 2013 that left 15 people dead, including two South Africans.
We call on all political groups outside the political process in Somalia to renounce violence and raise their concerns with the Federal Somali Government in a constructive and reconciliatory manner.
Cabinet calls on all South Africans to volunteer 67 minutes of their time on Nelson Mandela Day (18 July) to help change their communities and South Africa for the better.
This year’s event will take place under the theme of “Take action inspire change make every day a Mandela Day” with a focus on food security, shelter and literacy.
Cabinet noted that as part of the Nelson Mandela Day, the phased roll-out of the Smart ID card will be launched.
This launch is a significant break with our past and the end of the passbook era in South Africa.
The smart ID is a contactless card with a capability to accommodate information from various stakeholders now and in future.
The Minister of Home Affairs will provide more details in planned briefing in due course.
Cabinet welcomes the launch of the Department of Basic Education campaign called 94+ Projects for Madiba to celebrate Nelson Mandela’s birthday and legacy.
The campaign aims to improve infrastructure in over 94 schools to become state-of-the-art institutions of quality learning.
The campaign gives hope and dignity to schools across the country.
During Mandela Month from July 2013, the department will be leading the handover of completed new schools per week as part of the commitment to improve quality basic education.
Cabinet welcomes the completion and handover of the Nkosi Dalibhunga Mandela Legacy Bridge to the Mvezo community which is led by Nkosi Mandla Mandela, grandson of former President Nelson Mandela, on 18 July 2013.
The handover will coincide with the birthday of Former President Mr Nelson Mandela, who will turn 95 years of age on this day.
Cabinet noted South Africa’s commemoration of the United Nations International Day against Drug Abuse and Illicit Trafficking on 26 June 2013, in Kimberley.
The Day was used to emphasise the importance of dealing with challenges facing the world, including crime, HIV and AIDS, moral degeneration, domestic violence and teenage pregnancy.
Cabinet welcomes the hosting of the Science, Technology and Innovation Summit which takes place from 20 to 21 July.
The summit will address a recommendation of the Ministerial Review Committee report, improved coordination and integration within the National System of Innovation and strengthened dialogue between government, industry and academia.
Cabinet welcomes the report on progress made in Muyexe village in Giyani, Limpopo province in the implementation of commitments made by government to improve the lives of the people.
Cabinet further echoed the President’s concern that all levels of government should speed up delivery as per the agreed plans.
Cabinet welcomes the launch on Saturday, 29 June 2013 of SIP-18 which relates to the issues of infrastructure for the purpose of delivering on water and sanitation.
The project will ensure the provision of sustainable supply of water to meet social needs and support economic growth.
Cabinet welcomed a briefing it received on cartel activities in the construction sector.
Cabinet welcomes the outcome of the investigation that yielded evidence of pervasive price fixing, collusion and corruption in the private construction industry.
The scale of the collusion warrants firm action by the competition authorities.
Cabinet awaits the outcome of the Competition Tribunal process but notes that the evidence shows substantial damage to the public interest with inflated prices that the state paid as a result of the collusion."
Key Cabinet discussions and decisions Cabinet approved the National Drug Master Plan (2013-2017) and its implementation over the next five years.
The Plan serves as the country’s blueprint for preventing and reducing alcohol and substance abuse and its associated social and economic consequences on South African society.
Cabinet approved the Hosting of the National Broad-Based Black Economic Empowerment Summit in October 2013.
The National Summit will showcase success stories and articulate government’s interventions in support of effective and sustainable economic participation and access for black people in the mainstream of the economy, in a way that will contribute to inclusive growth.
Cabinet approved for South Africa to co-host the “Leading Change in the City” Conference with the United Nations Human Settlements programme (UN-HABITAT) on 5 and 6 September 2013.
The emphasis of the conference is on women’s participation in urban life in Africa.
The conference will provide a platform for Africa to adequately address the challenges of urbanisation and harness urbanisation for human development.
Cabinet approved the Draft White Paper on Families and the Implementation Plan.
Draft White Paper on Families will enable Government and other stakeholders to use family as the springboard for the realisation of societal well-being.
The White Paper proposes three key strategic priorities, Promotion of healthy family life, Family strengthening and Family preservation.
Cabinet approved the finalisation and gazetting of the second National Water Resource Strategy.
This strategy builds on the 2004 National Water Resource Strategy.
The National Water Resource Strategy 2 provides an analysis on the role of water in the economy and identifies the specific challenges, development opportunities and actions which inform an agreed framework for the priority areas of the country.
The Strategy 2 also seeks to ensure sustainable, equitable and secure water for a better life and environment for all and that water is efficiently and effectively managed for equitable and sustainable growth and development.
Cabinet approved the report on the Outcomes of the 16th meeting of the Conference of Parties to the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES CoP 16), held in Bangkok, Thailand from 3 – 14 March 2013.
Cabinet further approved that South Africa prepares and submits a trade proposal for consideration at CITES CoP 17 in 2016 in South Africa.
Cabinet accepted the invitation from the African Development Bank for South Africa to become a member of the Infrastructure Consortium for Africa (ICA) which was launched at the G8 Gleneagles Summit in 2005.
South Africa’s large investment in infrastructure over the medium term will be enhanced through its membership to the ICA especially in the generation of data and knowledge products and the coordination of development policies between the G20 and African countries.
Cabinet approved the submission of the Southern African Development Community (SADC) Protocol on Trade in Services to Parliament for ratification, in accordance with section 231 of the Constitution.
The objectives of the Protocol are to liberalise intra-regional trade in services on the basis of equity, balance and mutual benefit.
This Protocol also sets out a framework for the liberalisation of trade in services between SADC member states and serves as a basis for negotiations.
Cabinet noted the launch of the Bachelor of Human Settlements Development Degree (BHSD) in partnership between the Department of Higher Education and Training and the Nelson Mandela Metro University.
The Bachelor Degree (BHSD) is aimed at developing effective Human Settlements managers and practitioners who will possess the relevant knowledge and skills necessary to create, upgrade and speed up sustainable human settlements development in South Africa.
Cabinet calls on all government departments, municipalities and parastatals operating in Gauteng to register all state vehicles for e-tags.
Cabinet approved the implementation steps proposed for the establishment of a Border Management Agency (BMA).
The BMA would manage migration, customs and land border line control services and efficiently coordinate the service of all departments in ports of entry.
The Department of Home Affairs will be the lead Department in establishing the BMCabinet approved the following Bills for submission to Parliament.
Customs Control Bill (CCB), the Customs Duty Bill, 2013 (CDB) and the Customs and Excise Amendment Act, 2013 (CEAA) - The Bills provides a foundation for the facilitation of international trade and protection of the economy and society, thereby creating a balance between customs control and trade facilitation Water Research Amendment Bill - The Amendment aims to bring it in line with major changes in institutions, policy, water science and legal environment and also to increase the Water Research Commission’s contribution to the water research needs of South Africa and to ensure that the country is strategically placed to respond to the needs and challenges of an arid country like South Africa.
National Environmental Management Laws Amendment Bill, 2013 - The bill proposes amendments to certain provisions under the National Environmental Management Act, 1998 (Act No.
107 of 1998) and further ensure that the country’s natural resources are protected for current and future generation as contemplated by the National Development Plan (NDP).
Draft National Environmental Management: Air Quality Amendment Bill, 2013 - This Bill amends certain provisions under the National Environmental Management: Air Quality Act, 2004 which regulates air quality in the country to protect the environment by providing reasonable measures for the prevention of pollution and ecological degradation while promoting justifiable economic and social development.
National Environmental Management: Waste Amendment Bill, 2013 - The Bill amends the National Environmental Management: Waste Act, 2008 (Act No.
59 of 2008) which regulates waste management in order to protect health and the environment.
National Environmental Management: Protected Areas Amendment Bill, 2013 - The Bill amends the National Environmental Management: Protected Areas Act, 2003 (Act No.57 of 2003).
Amendments incorporate the management of Marine Protected Areas in the system of management of other Protected Areas as well as giving effect to the Presidential Proclamations separating the functions between fisheries and environmental management.
South African Postbank Limited Amendment Bill - The main objective of the South African Postbank Limited Act, 2010 (Act No.
9 of 2010) is to establish a financial institution for mass mobilisation of savings and investment and to create a bank of first choice for the lower income group.
Cabinet approved the unemployment Insurance Amendment Bill 2012 for public comments and for consultation with NEDLAC Social Partners.
This Bill amends the Unemployment Insurance Act, No.
63 of 2001.
This amendment addresses the issue of workers who are presently excluded in the Act and improve payment of benefits to contributors, extend the period of payment of benefits to the contributor from eight to twelve months and provides for the nomination of beneficiaries in case of death benefits.
Cabinet approved the submission of the Electoral Amendment Bill, 2013 to Parliament.
The Amendment Bill seeks to provide for special votes in elections for the National Assembly, as well as to provide for the registration of voters who are ordinarily resident outside the Republic to enable them to cast a special vote.
Appointments Cabinet concurs with the appointment Mr. Romeo Adams to the position of Deputy Director-General: Corporate Services in the Department of Justice and Constitutional Development.
Cabinet concurs with the appointment Ms Irene Rofhiwa Singo to the position of Chief Financial Officer in the Department of Mineral Resources.
Cabinet concurs with the appointment Ms Kalayvani Pillay to the position of Deputy Director-General: Legislative Development in the Department of Justice and Constitutional Development.
Cabinet concurs with the appointment Dr Bismark Tyobeka to the position of Chief Executive Officer of the National Nuclear Regulator of South Africa.
Cabinet concurs with the re-appointment of Mr Tsietsi Mokhele as Chief Executive Officer of the South African Maritime Safety Authority (SAMSA) for a period of five years with effect from 1 April 2013.
Cabinet concurs the re-appointment of the following Non-Executive members to the board of the South African National Accreditation System (SANAS), whose current term of office will expire on 30 November 2013, to serve a second term from 1 December 2013 to 30 November 2018.Vernon Roderick SeymourPhakamisa Zonke.
Cabinet noted the re-appointment of thirteen members to the South African Council for Space Affairs (SACSA) with effect from 24 June 2013 to 24 June 2015.
Cabinet also noted the appointment of representatives from the Department of Defence, Council of Scientific and Industrial Research and the Department of International Relations and Cooperation with effect from 24 June 2013 to 24 June 2015.Dr Peter MartinezMs Nomfuneko MajajaMr Kim Victor GorringeDr Sandile Bethuel MalingaMs Pontsho MarupingMs Andiswa MlisaDr Valanathan MunsamiMr Tenza ThembaMr Ron OlivierMr Linden PetzerMr Hendrik RheederAdv Phetole Patrick SekhuleDr Jo-Ansie Karina van WykNomination from the Department of DefenceNomination from the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR)Nomination from the Department of International Relations and Cooperation.
Cabinet noted the appointment of Mr. Kutoane Obed Kutoane as the Chief Executive Officer of the Export Credit Insurance Corporation of South Africa for a period of 3 years with effect from 1 August 2013 to 31 July 2016.
Cabinet noted the re-appointment of Profssor Linda De Vries as the Non-Executive Chairperson of the National Gambling Board for a second term of office with effect from 1 December 2013 to 30 November 2018.
Cabinet noted the appointment of Mr Ndwakhulu Samuel Mukhufhi as the Chief Executive Officer of the National Metrology Institute of South Africa (NMISA) for a period of 5 years with effect from 1 August 2013 to 31 July 2018.
Cabinet noted the appointment of Ms Agnes Tsele-Maseloanyane as a full-time Tribunal member to the Companies Tribunal for a period of 5 years with effect from 1 July 2013 to 30 June 2018.
Enquiries:Phumla Williams (Acting Cabinet Spokesperson)Cell: 083 501 0139
