Cabinet met on Wednesday, 9 May 2018, at Tuynhuys, Cape TownA. Issues in the environment1. Gender-based violence (GBV)1.1. Cabinet reiterates its condemnation of violence against women and children, and calls on all of us in our respective formations to take a stand in stopping violence against women, children and the Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgender communities.  1.2. It is the duty of every South African to educate one another on the rights of women and children, and on the various recourse mechanisms that exist to help victims of violence.1.3. Cabinet welcomes the decision by the South Gauteng High Court to sentence convicted murderer Sandile Mantsoe to 32 years in prison for the murder of his ex-girlfriend Karabo Mokoena. Other cases such as the discovery of the body of 10-year-old Katlego Joja in Mamelodi West, east of Pretoria and the killing of Zolile Khumalo, by a former student, at the Mangosuthu University of Technology in Durban, is testimony to the continuing challenges we face as a nation. Cabinet extends its heartfelt condolences to the Joja and Khumalo families.1.4. While justice and the law-enforcement agencies are seized with ensuring that the perpetrators do not go unpunished, as a society we all have a role to play in stopping these crimes. South Africans are encouraged to actively join advocacy and awareness-raising programmes in their respective communities and sectors.1.5. Cabinet also encourages victims to report these heinous crimes to law-enforcement authorities, who must investigate allegations of GBV and act firmly within the ambit of the law to ensure that justice is served.1.6. In a separate but related issue, the United Nations (UN) General Assembly proclaimed 13 June as International Albinism Awareness Day. The campaign aims to raise awareness about people living with albinism who are fully protected by the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa of 1996. It is the duty of all South Africans to educate themselves and others in the community on albinism so as to dispel myths and misconceptions. This will alleviate the trauma experienced by people with albinism and their families.2. International Association of Athletics Federations (IAAF) decision2.1. Cabinet expressed concerns with the developments regarding to the new regulations of the International Association of Athletics Federations (IAAF).2.2. Cabinet welcomes the work being done by the Department of Sport and Recreation South Africa and, the fact that a high level panel of experts in the related fields of medicine and law were assemble by SRSA. This panel will study these regulations closely and interrogate the scientific evidence that the IAAF had relied upon. It will evaluate all available research & scientific evidence as well as related ethical issues and use the outcome to challenge these regulations in the appropriate forums.2.3. Cabinet calls upon South Africans to   support all athletes that may be affected by these regulations both here at home and in the rest of the world.3. Situation in North West3.1. Cabinet was presented with the report by the Inter-Ministerial Task Team (IMTT) on North West. The report provided the preliminary work that has been done in the last two weeks.  Cabinet was satisfied with the progress made by the IMTT in its efforts to stabilise the Province.3.2. The IMTT, led by Minister in The Presidency, Dr Nkosazana Dlamini Zuma, will remain seized with the North West issues. A detailed media briefing on the outcomes of this work by the IMTT will be held in the North West next week.4. Japan-Africa Public-Private Economic Forum4.1. President Cyril Ramaphosa delivered a keynote address at the inaugural Japan-Africa Public-Private Economic Forum held at the Sandton Convention Centre from 3 to 4 May 2018. The forum was co-hosted by South Africa, together with the government of Japan and the Japan External Trade Organization.Cabinet welcomes the continued commitment that was made at the Tokyo International Conference on African Development in Nairobi, Kenya in 2016, which saw Japan pledging US$30 billion in Africa between 2016 and 2019. More than 100 Japanese companies have a presence in Africa.5. United States (US) Steel and Aluminum Tariff increase5.1. Cabinet expresses its disappointment on the decision by the US not to exempt South Africa from the application of steel and aluminum duties.5.2. The South African Government will continue to engage with US authorities to find a mutually acceptable outcome. Cabinet also encourages domestic exporters to continue to lobby US buyers to apply for product exemptions, as South African companies export niche products and semi-processed products for further processing in the US.6. Revitalisation of Industrial Parks6.1. Cabinet welcomes the completion of the first phase of the revitalisation of the Phuthaditjhaba Industrial Park in the Free State as an important milestone in implementing the Revitalisation of Industrial Parks Programme.6.2. The R50-million upgrades will attract more local entrepreneurs to set up their operations due to the improved infrastructure and security.7. Investment7.1. Cabinet congratulates the partnership between the Department of Trade and Industry (the dti) and Aspen Pharmacare, which has resulted in the announcement of a R1-billion investment in the pharmaceutical drug plant in Port Elizabeth in the Eastern Cape. The pharmaceutical company benefited from the dti’s 12I Tax Incentive with a tax credit of about R209 million.7.2. The opening of the facility will create 500 new jobs. This is a significant investment which is taking South Africa into a new level of manufacturing space and creating the necessary jobs that the country needs.8. Lower data costs8.1. Cabinet welcomes the new rules proposed by the Independent Communications Authority of South Africa to improve regulations around data, SMS and voice services.8.2. The changes are steps toward ensuring fairness in business practice around data pricing and ensure that consumers will not lose unused data. The Market Inquiry being conducted by the Competition Commission will highlight and focus on additional measures, to ensure South African data prices support broader digital access and prepare us for the opportunities created by the Fourth Industrial Revolution.9. Mining Sector9.1. Cabinet joins President Ramaphosa in expressing sadness following the loss of lives of mineworkers at the Sibanye-Stillwater’s Driefontein Mine near Carletonville on the West Rand, and furthermore extends its condolences to the families and friends of the deceased. The Minister of Mineral Resources, Mr Gwede Mantashe, is expected to represent government at a memorial service to be held this week.9.2. Cabinet urges the mining sector to fast-track their research that will assist us in the capability in detecting seismic activities in the mines and save lives.10. UN Children’s Fund (UNICEF)10.1. Cabinet joins President Ramaphosa in expressing appreciation for UNICEF’s support and cooperation in empowering the youth of South   Africa.10.2. Executive Director of UNICEF, Ms Henrietta Fore, paid a courtesy call to President Ramaphosa on Monday, 7 May 2018. She outlined UNICEF's  report on South Africa's initiatives in the areas of education, work skills development and economic opportunities for young people, especially for those between 10 and 18 years old. UNICEF commended South Africa’s efforts to create opportunities for young people to participate meaningfully in the economy, and expressed willingness to assist our country’s schools with the provision of water and sanitation.10.3. UNICEF has invited South Africa to share its success on youth empowerment as part of its global campaign to advance opportunities for youth – a sure sign of our country’s strengthening relations with the UN.B. Cabinet decisions1. Cabinet approved the Industrial Policy Action Plan (IPAP) 2018/19 – 2020/21. This is the 10th iteration of a rolling annual action plan aligned to successive three-year cycles of the Medium Term Expenditure Framework.The revised IPAP summarises the achievements of the industrial policy over the past nine years. It provides an economic analysis of the global and domestic economy relevant to industrial policy, summarises the challenges and constraints to the optimal implementation of the industrial policy, as well as a range of transversal and sector specific time-bound key action plans assigned to the respective departments.2. Cabinet approved that the Tripartite Free Trade Area (TFTA) Agreement be tabled in Parliament for ratification. The agreement establishes the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa, East African Community and Southern African Development Community.This TFTA is a key Africa-led project that marks a decisive step to overcome the continent’s colonial heritage of small fragmented markets, by promoting intra-African investments and attracting more foreign investment into the free trade area.As a result of regional integration efforts and stable economies, there has been strong growth in intra-African investments.3. Cabinet approved South Africa’s Third National Communication Report for submission to the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC).The primary objective of the UNFCCC is to achieve the stabilisation of greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere to a level that would prevent dangerous anthropogenic activities from interfering with the climate system.South Africa’s report contains an analysis of its progress from the initial National Communication to the Second National Communication and subsequently the Third Communication Report, as reviewed by the international community and domestic stakeholders.C. Bills1. Cabinet approved the submission of the Aquaculture Development Bill of 2018 to Parliament. The Bill, which came out of full consultation with all the relevant  stakeholders in the aquaculture sector, seeks to promote aquaculture development in the oceans economy. It provides, amongst others, the institutional arrangements of the sector; sets out the licensing and permitting  requirements for aquaculture and the establishment of the aquaculture development zones.2. Cabinet approved the submission of the Occupational Health and Safety Bill  of 2018 to Parliament. The Bill amends the Occupational Health and Safety Act, 1993 (Act 85 of 1993). Once adopted, the Bill will ensure greater protection of workers in respect of injuries and diseases at the workplace.The Bill establishes a clearly defined Health and Safety Management System and is in line with international best practice. It also provides for mandatory risk assessment to be conducted by the employer and a workplace-specific risk management plan developed and implemented to minimise the exposure of employees to risk.D. Messages1. Congratulations1.1. Cabinet congratulates President Ramaphosa, who has been invited by the International Labour Conference (ILO) Governing Body to co-chair the Global Commission on Future of Work.  1.2. The President has also been invited to address the conference, which is celebrating 100 years of existence. Whilst there he, will pay homage and honour the Centenary of former President Nelson Mandela. Cabinet thanks the Africa Group in the ILO governing body for leading the discussion in Geneva and appreciates the discussions held by the country’s ruling party in their local constituencies.2. Condolences2.1.Cabinet expresses condolences to the family and friends of the late former and first Minister of Finance of democratic South Africa, Mr Derek Keys, who played a significant role in the smooth handover of Treasury to a democratically elected government in 1994.   3. Ramadan3.1.Cabinet extends well wishes to the Muslim community as they begin fasting for the holy month of Ramadan next week. During Ramadan, Muslims fast from sunrise to sunset, as they spend time deepening their spirituality.E. Upcoming Events1. President Ramaphosa will today, 10 May 2018, visit the Department of Defence and Department of Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs (CoGTA) respectively, as part of his efforts to engage with senior leadership to ensure that the work of government is effectively aligned. This visit is part of the President’s commitment announced in his maiden State of the Nation Address in February 2018 to visit every national department in this regard.2.  Deputy President David Mabuza will today, 10 May 2018, address the 3rd Human Resource Development Council of South Africa Summit at Emperors Palace in Johannesburg under the theme: ‘Partnerships revitalising work and learning’. The two-day summit will bring together key industry leaders, labour experts and academics to deliberate on various issues, including proposals to deal with youth unemployment, and advance empowerment and the Fourth Industrial Revolution.3. Cabinet also reiterates the invitation to South Africans to join the year-long Centenary celebrations of Tata Nelson Mandela and Mama Albertina Sisulu, who helped build the foundation of the South Africa’s democracy we enjoy today. The Inter-Ministerial Committee on the Nelson Mandela Centenary and Centenary of Albertina Sisulu launched the National Programme this week. Details of the celebrations can be found on the government website (www.gov.za), where other upcoming government scheduled briefings/activities can also be found.F. AppointmentsAll appointments are subject to the verification of qualifications and the relevant clearance.1. Ms Lerato Mataboge as the dti representative to the Board of the Export Credit Insurance Corporation of South Africa SOC Limited.2. Ms RS Mogaladi as Deputy Director-General: Institutional Support and Co-ordination, CoGTA.Enquiries:Ms Phumla Williams – Acting Cabinet SpokespersonCell: 083 501 0139
